



Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: In the name of the Church he would serve these humble
people.
--Book 2, Page 77.]




CARMEN ARIZA

BY

CHARLES FRANCIS STOCKING, E. M.

Author of THE DIARY OF JEAN EVARTS, THE MAYOR OF FILBERT, Etc.

CHICAGO

THE MAESTRO CO.

1921




Copyright 1915

BY

CHARLES FRANCIS STOCKING

ISSUED JANUARY 1916

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

TWENTY-FIFTH EDITION

PRINTED IN U. S. A.




CARMEN ARIZA




BOOK 1


  Doth this offend you?--the words that I speak unto you, they are
  spirit, and they are life.

                                                          --_Jesus._




CARMEN ARIZA

CHAPTER 1


The tropical sun mounted the rim of the golden Caribbean, quivered
for a moment like a fledgeling preening its wings for flight, then
launched forth boldly into the vault of heaven, shattering the
lowering vapors of night into a myriad fleecy clouds of every form
and color, and driving them before it into the abysmal blue above.
Leaping the sullen walls of old Cartagena, the morning beams began to
glow in roseate hues on the red-tiled roofs of this ancient metropolis
of New Granada, and glance in shafts of fire from her glittering
domes and towers. Swiftly they climbed the moss-grown sides of church
and convent, and glided over the dull white walls of prison and
monastery alike. Pouring through half-turned shutters, they plashed
upon floors in floods of gold. Tapping noiselessly on closed
portals, they seemed to bid tardy sleepers arise, lest the hurrying
midday _siesta_ overtake them with tasks unfinished. The dormitory of
the ecclesiastical college, just within the east wall of the city,
glowed brilliantly in the clear light which it was reflecting to
the mirror of waters without. Its huge bulk had caught the first rays
of the rising sun, most of which had rebounded from its drab,
incrusted walls and sped out again over the dancing sea. A few,
however, escaped reflection by stealing through the slanting
shutters of a window close under the roof of the building. Within,
they fell upon a man kneeling on the tiled floor beside a rude cot
bed.

In appearance the man was not more than twenty-five years of age. His
black, close-curling hair, oval face, and skin of deep olive tint
indicated a Latin origin. His clerical garb proclaimed him a son of
the Church. The room was a small, whitewashed cell of stone, musty
with the dampness which had swept in from the sea during the night. It
was furnished with Spartan simplicity. Neither image, crucifix, nor
painting adorned its walls--the occupant's dress alone suggested his
calling. A hanging shelf held a few books, all evidently used as
texts in the adjoining college. A table, much littered; a wooden
dressing stand, with a small mirror; and an old-fashioned, haircloth
trunk, bearing numerous foreign labels, eked out the paucity of
furnishings.

If the man prayed, there was only his reverent attitude to indicate
it, for no words escaped his lips. But the frequent straining of his
tense body, and the fierce clenching of his thin hands, as he threw
his arms out over the unopened bed, were abundant evidence of a soul
tugging violently at its moorings. His was the attitude of one who has
ceased to inveigh against fate, who kneels dumbly before the cup of
Destiny, knowing that it must be drained.

With the break of day the bells awoke in the church towers throughout
the old city, and began to peal forth their noisy reminder of the
virility of the Holy Catholic faith. Then the man raised his head,
seemingly startled into awareness of his material environment. For a
few moments he listened confusedly to the insistent clatter--but he
made no sign of the cross, nor did his head bend with the weight of a
hollow _Ave_ on his bloodless lips while the clamoring muezzins filled
the warm, tropical air with their jangling appeal. Rising with an air
of weary indifference, he slowly crossed the room and threw wide the
shutters of the solitary window, admitting a torrent of sunlight. As
he did this, the door of the cell softly opened, and a young novitiate
entered.

"With your permission, Padre," said the boy, bowing low. "His Grace
summons you to the Cathedral."

The man made a languid gesture of dismissal, and turned from the lad
to the rare view which greeted him through the open window. The dusty
road below was beginning to manifest the city's awakening. Barefooted,
brown-skinned women, scantily clad in cheap calico gowns, were
swinging along with shallow baskets under their arms to the _plaza_
for the day's marketing. Some carried naked babes astride their hips;
some smoked long, slender cigars of their own rolling. Half-clad
children of all ages, mixtures of _mestizo_, Spaniard, and Jamaican
<DW64>, trotted along beside them; and at intervals a blustering
_cochero_ rattled around the corner in a rickety, obsolete type of
trap behind a brace of emaciated horses.

The lively gossip of the passing groups preluded the noisy chaffering
to follow their arrival at the market place.

"_Caramba_, little pig!" shrilled a buxom matron, snatching her naked
offspring away from a passing vehicle. "Think you I have money to
waste on Masses for your naughty soul?"

"_Na, senora_," bantered another, "it will cost less now than later to
get him out of purgatory."

"But, _comadre_, do you stop at the Cathedral to say a _Pater-noster_?"

"To be sure, _amiga_, and an _Ave_, too. And let us return by way of
the Hotel Espana, for, _quien sabe_? we may catch a glimpse of the
famous _matador_."

"Senor Varilla?"

"Yes. He arrived from Barranquilla last night--so my Pedro tells
me--and will fight in the arena this Sunday. I have saved fifty
_pesos_ to see him. _Madre de Dios!_ but I would sell my soul to see
him slay but a single bull. And do you go?"

"God willing!"

The soft air, tempered by the languid ocean breeze, bore aloft the
laughter and friendly bantering of the marketers, mingled with the
awakening street sounds and the morning greetings which issued from
opening doors and windows. The scent of roses and the heavier
sweetness of orchids and tropical blooms drifted over the ancient city
from its innumerable _patios_ and public gardens. The age-incrusted
buildings fused in the mounting sun into squares of dazzling white,
over which the tiled roofs flowed in cinctures of crimson. Far off at
sea the smoke of an approaching vessel wove fantastic designs against
the tinted sky. Behind the city the convent of Santa Candelaria,
crowning the hill of La Popa, glowed like a diamond; and stretching
far to the south, and merging at the foot of the _Cordilleras_ into
the gloom-shrouded, menacing jungle, the steaming llanos offered
fleeting glimpses of their rich emerald color as the morning breeze
stirred the heavy clouds of vapor which hung sullenly above them.

To all this the man, looking vacantly out across the city walls to
where the sea birds dipped on the rippling waves, was apparently
oblivious. Nor did he manifest the slightest interest in the animated
scene before him until a tall, heavy-set young priest emerged from the
entrance of the dormitory below and stopped for a moment in the middle
of the road to bask in the brilliant sunlight and fill his lungs with
the invigorating ocean breeze. Turning his eyes suddenly upward, the
latter caught sight of the man at the window.

"Ah, _amigo_ Jose!" he called in friendly greeting, his handsome face
aglow with a cordial smile. "Our good Saint Claver has not lobbied for
us in vain! We shall yet have a good day for the bulls, no?"

"An excellent one, I think, Wenceslas," quickly replied the man
addressed, who then turned abruptly away as if he wished to avoid
further conversation. The priest below regarded the empty window for a
moment. Then, with a short, dry laugh and a cynical shrug of his broad
shoulders, he passed on.

As the man above turned back into the room his face, wearing the look
of one far gone in despair, was contorted with passion. Fear,
confusion, and undefined soul-longing seemed to move rapidly across
it, each leaving its momentary impression, and all mingling at times
in a surging flood that swelled the veins of his temples to the point
of rupture. Mechanically he paced his narrow cell, throwing frequent
furtive glances at the closed door, as if he suspected himself
watched. Often he stopped abruptly, and with head bowed and brows
furrowed, seemed to surrender his soul to the forces with which it was
wrestling. Often he clasped his head wildly in his hands and turned
his beseeching eyes upward, as if he would call upon an invisible
power above to aid him, yet restrained by the deadening conviction of
experience that such appeal would meet with no response, and that he
must stand in his own strength, however feeble.

Hours passed thus. The sun gained the zenith and the streets were
ablaze. Belated marketers, with laden baskets atop their heads, were
hurrying homeward, hugging the scanty shade of the glaring buildings.
Shopkeepers were drawing their shutters and closing their heavy doors,
leaving the hot noon hour asleep on the scorching portals. The midday
_Angelus_ called from the Cathedral tower. Then, as if shaken into
remembrance of the message which the boy had brought him at daybreak,
the man hurriedly took his black felt hat from the table, and without
further preparation left the room.

The stone pavements and narrow brick walks, above which the intense
heat hung in tremulous waves, were almost deserted as he hastened
toward the Cathedral. The business of the morning was finished; trade
was suspended until the sun, now dropping its fiery shafts straight as
plummets, should have sunk behind La Popa. As he turned into the Calle
Lozano an elderly woman, descending the winding brick stairway visible
through the open door of one of the numerous old colonial houses in
the lower end of this thoroughfare, called timidly to him.

"Marcelena," the priest returned, stopping. "The girl--is she--?"

"She is dying," interrupted the woman in a voice broken with sobs.

"Dying! Then the child--?"

"Yes, Padre, born an hour ago--a boy. It lives. Ah, _Santa Virgen_,
such suffering! Pray for us, Mother of God!" murmured the weeping
woman, bending her head and repeatedly making the sign of the cross.

"Who is with her now?" the priest continued hurriedly.

"Only Catalina. The doctor said he would return. He is good to the
blessed child. And Padre Lorenzo came--but he would not shrive her
little white soul--"

"And the father--?"

"He does not know," the woman sobbed. "Who would dare to tell him!
Think you he would come? That he would own the babe? He would not give
one blessed candle to set beside the little mother's poor sweet body!
Ah, _Santa Maria_! who will buy Masses for her little soul? Who--?"

"But he _shall_ know!" cried the priest, his face livid. "And he shall
acknowledge his child and care for it! _Dios--!_ But wait, Marcelena.
I can do nothing now. But I will return." Leaving the woman sobbing
prayers to the Virgin Mother, the priest hurried on.

Within the Cathedral the cool atmosphere met him with a sweet calm,
which flowed over his perturbed soul like a benediction. He drew a
chair from a pile in a corner and sat down for a moment near one of
the little side chapels, to recover from the stifling heat without and
prepare his thought for the impending interview with the Bishop. A dim
twilight enveloped the interior of the building, affording a grateful
relief from the blinding glare of the streets. It brought him a
transient sense of peace--the peace which his wearied soul had never
fully known. Peace brooded over the great nave, and hovered in the
soft air that drifted slowly through the deserted aisle up to the High
Altar, where lay the Sacred Host. A few votive candles were struggling
to send their feeble glow through the darkness. The great images of
the suffering Christ, of the Saints and the Virgin Mother had merged
their outlines into the heavy shadows which lay upon them.

The haunting memory of years of soul-struggle with doubt and fear, of
passionate longing for the light of truth in the gloom of superstition
and man-made creeds, for guidance among the devious paths of human
conjecture which lead nowhither--or to madness--seemed to fade into
the darkness which wrapped him in that holy calm. After all, what had
he won in his lifelong warfare with human beliefs? What had he gained
by his mad opposition to Holy Church? There she stood, calm, majestic,
undisturbed. Had not the Christ himself declared that the gates of
hell should not prevail against her? Was not the unfoldment of truth a
matter, not of years, but of ages? And were the minds of men to-day
prepared for higher verities than those she offered? Did not the
Church plant the seed as rapidly as the barren soil of the human mind
was tilled and made fallow? True, her sons, whom he had so obstinately
opposed, were blindly zealous. But were they wholly without wisdom?
Had not his own zeal been as unreasoningly directed to the forcing of
events? And still, through it all, she had held her indulgent arms
extended to him, as to all erring mankind. Why not now, like a tired
child, weary of futile resistance, yield to her motherly embrace and
be at last at peace? Again the temptation which he had stubbornly
resisted for a lifetime urged upon him with all its mesmeric
insistence.

He looked up, and his glance fell upon a small, glass-covered case,
dimly visible in the uncertain light at one side of the little altar.
The case was filled with tiny images of gold--_milagros_. Each had
received priestly blessing, and each was believed to have worked a
miraculous cure. The relaxed lines of the priest's care-worn face
instantly drew into an expression of hard austerity. Like the ebb of
the ocean, his recalcitrant thought surged back again in a towering
flood.

"What a spectacle!" he murmured. "Holy Church, assuming spiritual
leadership of the world, sunken in idolatry, and publicly parading her
fetishism in these lingering echoes of primitive demon-worship!"

Ah, the Master taught the omnipotence of God, whose ways he declared
as high above the blind grovelings of man as the dome of heaven swings
above earth. But how long, gentle Master, shall such as this be
declared thy Father's ways? How long shall superstition and idolatry
retain the power to fetter the souls of men? Is there no end to the
black curse of ignorance of Truth, which, after untold centuries,
still makes men sink with vain toil and consume with disease? And--are
those who sit about Peter's gorgeous tomb and approve these things
unerring guides to a right knowledge of God, to know whom, the Christ
has said, is life eternal?

A step behind him broke the flow of his dark revery.

"Our good Jose dreams below, while His Grace bites his nails above,"
said a soft, mellifluous voice. "_Que chiste!_ It is--"

The priest sprang to his feet and faced the speaker. For a moment the
men regarded each other, the one uncertain as to the impending event,
but supremely confident of his ability to meet it; the other sick in
soul and torn with mental struggle, but for the moment fired anew with
the righteous wrath which his recent brief interview with the woman,
Marcelena, had kindled.

"Wenceslas--" The priest spoke in a strained, uncertain tone, striving
to hold his emotions in leash. "I have learned to-day--The girl,
Maria--"

"_Caro amigo_," interrupted Wenceslas smoothly, "what you have learned
to-day, or any other day, of the girl, Maria, is a lie."

"_Hombre!_" The priest turned livid. Stepping closer to Wenceslas--

"Do you think, inhuman! that I have not long known of your relations
with this girl? Who has not! And, further, I know--and Cartagena shall
know--that to-day she lies dying beside your child!"

Wenceslas recoiled. His face flushed, and the veins of his forehead
swelled with a purple flood. Then a pallor spread over his features,
and beads of perspiration started from his pores.

It was but momentary. Recovering himself, he laid a large hand on the
priest's shoulder, and, his face assuming its wonted smile, said in
his usual low tone, "_Amigo_, it seems that you have a penchant for
spreading gossip. Think you I am ignorant of the fact that because of
it Rome spewed you out for a meddlesome pest? Do you deceive yourself
that Cartagena will open her ears to your garbled reports? The hag,
Marcelena, lies! She has long hoped to gain some advantage from me, I
have told you-- But go now above and learn from His Grace, whom you
have had the impudence to keep waiting all morning, how tongues that
wag too freely can be silenced." He checked himself suddenly, as if he
feared he had said too much. Then, turning on his heel, he quickly
left the Cathedral.

The priest's head sank upon his breast, and he stood, infirm of
purpose and choking with words which he could not voice. The whirl in
which his confused brain had revolved for months--nay, years--had made
the determination of conduct with him a matter of hours, of days, of
weeks. Spontaneity of action had long since ceased within his fettered
mind, where doubt had laid its detaining hand upon his judgment.
Uncertainty of his steps, fear of their consequence, and dread lest he
precipitate the calamity which he felt hung always just above him, had
sapped the courage and strength of will which his soul needed for a
determined stand, and left him incapable of decisive action, even in
the face of grossest evil. The mordant reply of Wenceslas only
strengthened his conviction of the futility of massing his own feeble
forces against those of one so thoroughly entrenched as this man, who
had the ear of the Bishop--nay, whose resourceful mind was now said to
be actually directing the policies of the feeble old ecclesiastic who
held the bishopric of Cartagena.

As if groping through the blackness of midnight, he moved slowly down
the deserted nave of the Cathedral and mounted the winding stairs to
the ambulatory above. Pausing at the door of the _sanctum_ for a
moment to gather up his remnant of moral strength, he entered and
stood hesitant before the waiting Bishop.




CHAPTER 2


The long War of Independence which destroyed the last vestige of
Spanish control over the Peruvian colonies of South America was
virtually brought to a close by the terrific battle of Ayacucho,
fought on the plains between Pizarro's city of Lima and the ancient
Inca seat of Cuzco in the fall of 1824. The result of this battle had
been eagerly awaited in the city of Cartagena, capital of the newly
formed federation of Colombia. It was known there that the Royalist
army was concentrating for a final stand. It was known, too, that its
veterans greatly outnumbered the nondescript band of patriots, many of
whom were provided only with the _arma blanca_, the indispensable
_machete_ of tropical America. This fact lent a shred of encouragement
to the few proud Tory families still remaining in the city and
clinging forlornly to their broken fortunes, while vainly hoping for a
reestablishment of the imperial regimen, as they pinned their fate to
this last desperate conflict. Among these, none had been prouder, none
more loyal to the Spanish Sovereign, and none more liberal in
dispensing its great wealth to bolster up a hopeless cause than the
ancient and aristocratic family at whose head stood Don Ignacio Jose
Marquez de Rincon, distinguished member of the _Cabildo_, and most
loyal subject of his imperial majesty, King Ferdinand VII. of Spain.

The house of Rincon traced its lineage back to the ferocious
adventurer, Juan de Rincon, favorite lieutenant of the renowned
_Conquistador_, Pedro de Heredia. When the latter, in the year 1533,
obtained from Charles V. the concession of New Andalusia, the whole
territory comprised between the mouths of the Magdalena and Atrato
rivers in what is now the Republic of Colombia, and undertook the
conquest of this enormously rich district, the fire-eating Juan, whom
the chroniclers of that romantic period quaintly described as "causing
the same effects as lightning and quicksilver," was his most
dependable support. Together they landed at the Indian village of
Calamari, and, after putting the pacific inhabitants to the sword--a
manner of disposal most satisfactory to the practical Juan--laid the
foundations of the present city of Cartagena, later destined to become
the "Queen of the Indies," the pride, as it was the despair, of the
haughty monarchs of Spain.

For his eminent services in this exploit Juan received a large tract
of land in the most fertile part of the Magdalena valley--which he
immediately staked and lost at the gaming-table. As a measure of
consolation, and doubtless with the view of checking Juan's gambling
propensities, Pedro de Heredia then bestowed upon him a strip of bleak
and unexplored mountain country adjacent to the river Atrato. Stung by
his sense of loss, as well as by the taunts of his boisterous
companions, and harassed by the practical conclusion that life's
brevity would not permit of wiping out their innumerable insults
singly by the sword, the raging Juan gathered together a few
blood-drinking companions of that ilk and set out to find diversion of
mind on his possessions.

Years passed. One day Juan again appeared on the streets of Cartagena,
and this time with gold enough to buy the city. The discovery of rich
auriferous sands on his estates adjoining the Atrato, which were
worked extensively for him by the natives whom he and his companions
had forced into subjection, had yielded him enormous wealth. He
settled in Cartagena, determined to make it his future home, and at
once set about buying great blocks of houses and erecting a palace for
himself. He began to acquire lands and mines in all directions. He
erected a sumptuous summer residence in what is now the suburb of
Turbaco. He built an _arena_, and bred bulls for it from famous stock
which he imported from the mother-country. He gave _fetes_ and public
entertainments on the most lavish scale imaginable. In short, he
quickly became Cartagena's most influential and distinguished citizen,
as he was easily her richest.

But far more important to mention than all these dry details was the
undoubted change of character which had come over the man himself.
Perhaps it was the awful heat of the steaming Atrato valley that drew
the fire from his livid soul. Perhaps it was a dawning appreciation of
the opportunities made possible by his rapid acquisition of wealth
that had softened his character. Some said he had seen a vision of the
Virgin Mary. Others laid it to a terrible fever, in which for days he
had lain delirious in the shadow of death. Be that as it may, the
bloodthirsty _Conquistador_, who a few years before angrily shook the
dust of Cartagena from his feet, had now returned a changed man.

At once Juan began to manifest in an ever increasing degree an
interest in matters religious. In this respect his former character
suffered a complete reversal. He assiduously cultivated the clergy,
and gave large sums for the support of the Cathedral and the religious
orders of the city. The Bishop became a frequent guest at his
sumptuous table; and as often he in turn sought the Bishop for
consultation anent his benefactions and, in particular, for
consolation when haunted by sad memories of his devilish exploits in
early life. When the great-hearted Padre Bartolome de las Casas,
infirm but still indefatigable in his work for the protection and
uplift of the Indians, arrived one memorable day in his little canoe
which his devoted native servants had paddled through the _dique_ from
the great river beyond, Juan was the first to greet him and insist
that he make his home with him while in the city. And on the night of
the Padre's arrival it is said that Juan, with tears streaming down
his scarred and wrinkled face, begged to be allowed to confess to him
the awful atrocities which he had committed upon the innocent and
harmless aborigines when, as was his wont, his breath hot with the
lust of blood, he had fallen upon them without provocation and hewed
them limb from limb.

In his old age the now gentle Juan, his former self almost obliterated,
expressed a desire to renounce the world, bestow his great wealth upon
the Church, and enter a monastery to pass his remaining years. Despite
the protestations of his numerous family, for whom his religious zeal
would permit him to leave but scanty provision, he was already
formulating plans toward this end when death overtook him, and his vast
estates descended intact to the family which he had founded.

So complete had been the transformation of Juan de Rincon during the
many years that he lived after his return to Cartagena that the
characteristics which he transmitted to his posterity were, in
general, quite the reverse of those which he himself had manifested so
abundantly in early life. Whereas, he had formerly been atrociously
cruel, boastingly impious, and a scoffer at matters religious, his
later descendants were generally tender of heart, soft of manner, and
of great piety. Whereas, in early manhood he had been fiery and
impulsive, quick of decision and immovable of opinion, his progeny
were increasingly inclined to be deliberate in judgment and
vacillating of purpose. So many of his descendants entered the
priesthood that the family was threatened with extinction, for in the
course of time it had become a sacred custom in the Rincon family to
consecrate the first-born son to the Church. This custom at length
became fixed, and was rigidly observed, even to the point of bigotry,
despite the obliteration of those branches where there was but a
single son.

The family, so auspiciously launched, waxed increasingly rich and
influential; and when the smoldering fires of revolution burst into
flame among the oppressed South American colonies, late in the year
1812, the house of Rincon, under royal and papal patronage, was found
occupying the first position of eminence and prestige in the proud old
city of Cartagena. Its wealth had become proverbial. Its sons,
educated by preceptors brought from Paris and Madrid, were prominent
at home and abroad. Its honor was unimpeachable. Its fair name was one
of the most resplendent jewels in the Spanish crown. And Don Ignacio
epitomized loyalty to Sovereign and Pope.

With the inauguration of hostilities no fears were felt by the
Rincon family for the ultimate success of the royalist arms, and
Don Ignacio immediately despatched word to his Sovereign in Madrid
that the wealth and services of his house were at the royal
disposal. Of this offer Ferdinand quickly availed himself. The Rincon
funds were drawn upon immediately and without stint to furnish men
and muniments for the long and disastrous struggle. Of the family
resources there was no lack while its members held their vast
possessions of lands and mines. But when, after the first successes
of the patriots, reprisals began to be visited upon the Tories of
Cartagena, and their possessions fell, one after another, into the
hands of the successful revolutionists, or were seized by former
slaves, Don Ignacio found it difficult to meet his royal master's
demands. The fickle King, already childish to the verge of imbecility,
gave scant thanks in return for the Rincon loyalty, and when at last,
stripped of his fortune, deserted by all but the few Tory families
who had the courage to remain in Cartagena until the close of the
war, Don Ignacio received with sinking heart the news of the battle
of Ayacucho, he knew full well that any future appeal to Ferdinand for
recognition of his great sacrifices would fall upon unhearing ears.

But to remain in republican Cartagena after the final success of the
revolutionists was to the royalist Don Ignacio quite impossible. Even
if permitted the attempt, he was so attached to the ancient order of
things that he could not adjust himself to the radically changed
conditions. So, gathering about him the sorrowing remnant of his
family, and converting into a pitifully small sum his few remaining
possessions, he took passage on an English trader and sailed for the
mother-country, to begin life anew among those whose speech and
customs were most familiar to him.

He settled in Seville, where the elder of his two sons, Rafael de
Rincon, a lad of fifteen, was studying for the priesthood, under the
patronage of the Archbishop. There he established himself in the wine
business, associating with him his second son, Carlos, only a year the
junior of his brother. But, broken in spirit as well as in fortune, he
made little headway, and two years later died pitiably in poverty and
obscurity.

Through the influence of the Archbishop, the business, which Carlos
was far too young and immature to conduct, was absorbed by larger
interests, and the young lad retained as an employe. As the years
passed the boy developed sufficient commercial ability to enable him
to retain his position and to extract from it enough to provide for
the needs of himself and his dependents. He married, late in life, a
woman whose family had fled from Cartagena with his own and settled in
Seville. She was but a babe in arms at the time of the exodus, and
many years his junior. A year after the marriage a child was born to
them, a son. The babe's birth was premature, following a fright which
the mother received when attacked by a beggar. But the child lived.
And, according to the honored family custom, which the father insisted
on observing as rigidly in Spain as it had been formerly in Cartagena,
this son, Jose Francisco Enrique de Rincon, was at birth consecrated
to the service of God in the Holy Catholic Church.




CHAPTER 3


If, as Thoreau said, "God is on the side of the most sensitive," then
He should have been very close to the timid, irresolute lad in
Seville, in whom the softer traits of character, so unexpectedly
developed in the adventurous founder of the Rincon family, now stood
forth so prominently. Somber, moody, and retiring; delicately
sensitive and shrinking; acutely honest, even to the point of
morbidity; deeply religious and passionately studious, with a
consuming zeal for knowledge, and an unsatisfied yearning for truth,
the little Jose early in life presented a strange medley of
characteristics, which bespoke a need of the utmost care and wisdom on
the part of those who should have the directing of his career. Forced
into the world before his time, and strongly marked by his mother's
fear; afflicted with precarious health, and subjected to long and
desperate illnesses in childhood, his little soul early took on a
gloom and asceticism wholly unnatural to youth. Fear was constantly
instilled into his acutely receptive mind by his solicitous, doting
parents; and his life was thereby stunted, warped, and starved. He was
reared under the constant reminder of the baleful effects of food, of
air, of conduct, of this and that invisible force inimical to health;
and terror and anxiety followed him like a ghost and turned about all
his boyish memories. Under these repressing influences his mind could
not but develop with a lack of stamina for self-support. Hesitancy and
vacillation became pronounced. In time, the weight of any important
decision gave him acute, unendurable agony of mind. Called upon to
decide for himself a matter of import, his thought would become
confused, his brain torpid, and in tears and perplexity the tormented
lad would throw himself into the arms of his anxious parents and beg
to be told what course to pursue.

Thus his nature grew to depend upon something stronger than itself to
twine about. He sought it in his schoolmates; but they misread him.
The little acts which were due to his keen sensitiveness or to his
exaggerated reticence of disposition were frequently interpreted by
them as affronts, and he was generally left out of their games, or
avoided entirely. His playmates consequently became fewer and more
transient as the years gained upon him, until at length, trodden upon,
but unable to turn, he withdrew his love from the world and bestowed
it all upon his anxious mother. She became his only intimate, and from
her alone he sought the affection for which he yearned with an
intensity that he could not express. Shunning the boisterous,
frolicking children at the close of the school day, he would seek her,
and, nestling at her side, her hand clasped in his, would beg her to
talk to him of the things with which his childish thought was
struggling. These were many, but they revolved about a common
center--religion.

The salient characteristics already mentioned were associated with
others, equally prominent, and no less influential in the shaping of
his subsequent career. With the development of his deep, inward
earnestness there had appeared indications of latent powers of mind
that were more than ordinary. These took the form of childish
precocity in his studies, clearness of spiritual vision, and
maturity in his conduct and mode of life. The stunting of his
physical nature threw into greater prominence his exaggerated
soul-qualities, his tenderness, his morbid conscientiousness, and a
profound emotionalism which, at the sight of a great painting, or
the roll of the Cathedral organ, would flood his eyes and fill his
throat with sobs. When the reckless founder of the family experienced
a reversal of his own dark traits of soul, nearly three centuries
before, it was as if the pendulum had swung too far in the opposite
direction, and at the extreme point of its arc had left the little
Jose, with the sterner qualities of the old _Conquistador_ wholly
neutralized by self-condemnation, fear, infirmity of purpose, a high
degree of intellectuality, and a soul-permeating religious fervor.

At the mention of religion the timid lad at once became passionate,
engrossed--nay, obsessed. In his boyhood years, before the pall of
somber reticence had settled over him, he had been impressed with the
majesty of the Church and the gorgeousness of her material fabric. The
religious ideals taught him by his good mother took deep root. But the
day arrived when the expansion of his intellect reached such a point
as to enable him to detect a flaw in her reasoning. It was but a
little rift, yet the sharp edge of doubt slipped in. Alas! from that
hour he ceased to drift with the current of popular theological
belief; his frail bark turned, and launched out upon the storm-tossed
sea, where only the outstretched hand of the Master, treading the
heaving billows through the thick gloom, saved it at length from
destruction.

The hungry lad began to question his parents incessantly regarding the
things of the spirit. His teachers in the parochial school he plied
with queries which they could not meet. Day after day, while other
boys of his tender age romped in the street, he would steal into the
great Cathedral and stand, pathetically solitary, before the statues
of the Christ and the Virgin Mary, yearning over the problems with
which his childish thought was struggling, and the questions to which
no one could return satisfying replies.

Here again the boy seemed to manifest in exaggerated form the reversed
characteristics of the old _Conquistador_. But, unlike that of the
pious Juan, the mind of the little Jose was not so simple as to permit
it to accept without remonstrance the tenets of his family's faith.
Blind acceptance of any teaching, religious or secular, early became
quite impossible to him. This entailed many an hour of suffering to
the lad, and brought down upon his little head severe punishments from
his preceptors and parents. But in vain they admonished and
threatened. The child demanded proofs; and if proofs were not at hand,
his acceptance of the mooted teaching was but tentative, generally
only an outward yielding to his beloved mother's inexorable
insistence. Many the test papers he returned to his teachers whereon
he had written in answer to the questions set, "I am taught to reply
thus; but in my heart I do not believe it." Vainly the teachers
appealed to his parents. Futilely the latter pleaded and punished. The
placid receptiveness of the Rincon mind, which for more than three
hundred years had normally performed its absorptive functions and
imbibed the doctrines of its accepted and established human
authorities, without a trace of the heresy of suspecting their
genuineness, had at last experienced a reversal. True, the boy had
been born in the early hours of nineteenth century doubt and religious
skepticism. The so-called scientific spirit, buried for ages beneath
the _debris_ of human conjecture, was painfully emerging and preening
its wings for flight. The "higher criticism" was nascent, and ancient
traditions were already beginning to totter on the foundations which
the Fathers had set. But Spain, close wrapped in mediaeval dreams, had
suffered no taint of "modernism." The portals of her mind were well
guarded against the entrance of radical thought, and her dreamers were
yet lulled into lethargic adherence to outworn beliefs and musty
creeds by the mesmerism of priestly tradition. The peculiar cast of
mind of the boy Jose was not the product of influences from without,
but was rather an exemplification of the human mind's reversion to
type, wherein the narrow and bigoted mentality of many generations had
expanded once more into the breadth of scope and untrammeled freedom
of an ancient progenitor.

As the boy grew older his ability to absorb learning increased
astonishingly. His power of analysis, his keen perception and
retentive memory soon advanced him beyond the youths of his own age,
and forced him to seek outside the pale of the schoolroom for the
means to satisfy his hunger for knowledge. He early began to haunt the
bookstalls of Seville, and day after day would stand for hours
searching the treasures which he found there, and mulling over books
which all too frequently were _anathema_ to the orthodox. Often the
owner of one of these shops, who knew the lad's parents, and whose
interest had been stirred by his passion for reading, would let him
take one or more of the coveted volumes home over night, for the
slender family purse would not permit him to purchase what his heart
craved. Then came feasts for his famished little soul which often
lasted until daybreak.

It happened one evening that, when he crept off to his little room to
peer into one of these borrowed treasures, his father followed him.
Pushing the chamber door softly open the parent found the boy propped
against his pillow in bed, absorbed in a much-thumbed volume which he
was reading by the pale light of the single candle.

"Is it thus that you deceive your poor parents?" the fond father
began, in a tone of mock severity.

The startled lad stifled a cry and hastily thrust the book beneath his
pillow. The father's interest now became genuine. Leaning over the
terrified boy he drew forth the volume.

"Voltaire!"

The doting father stood petrified. Voltaire, _Antichrist_, Archfiend
of impiety--and in the hands of his beloved son!

Sleep fled the little household that night. In his father's arms,
while the distressed mother hung over them, the boy sobbed out his
confession. He had not intended to deceive. He had picked up this book
in the stall without knowing its nature. He had become so interested
in what it said about the Virgin Mary that he forgot all else. The
shopkeeper had found him reading it, and had laughed and winked at his
clerk when he bade the boy take it home for the night. The book had
fascinated him. He himself--did not his father know?--had so often
asked how the Virgin could be the mother of God, and why men prayed to
her. Yes, he knew it mocked their faith--and the sacred Scriptures. He
knew, too, that his father would not approve of it. That was why he
had tried to hide it beneath his pillow. He had been wicked,
desperately wicked, to deceive his dear parents--But the book--It made
him forget--It said so many things that seemed to be true--And--and--

"Oh, _padre mio_, forgive me, forgive me! I want to know the truth
about God and the world!" The delicate frame of the young lad shook in
paroxysms of grief.

Alas! it was but the anguished soul-cry which has echoed through the
halls of space since time began. What a mockery to meet it with empty
creed and human dogma! Alas! what a crime against innocence to stifle
the honest questionings of a budding mind with the musty cloak of
undemonstrable beliefs.

"But, my son, have I not often told you? The Holy Church gives us the
truth," replied the father, frightened by the storm which raged within
the childish soul, yet more alarmed at the turn which the mind of his
cherished son was apparently taking--his only son, dedicated to the
service of God from the cradle, and in whom the shattered hopes of
this once proud family were now centered.

"But this book laughs at us because we pray to a woman!" sobbed the
boy.

"True. But does not its author need the prayers of so pure a woman as
the Virgin? Do we not all need them? And is it not likely that one so
good as she would have great influence with God--much greater than we
ourselves, or even the best of men, could have?"

"But how can she be the mother of God? The Bible does not teach
that!"

"How do you know that the Bible does not teach it, my son?"

"I--I--have read--the Bible," faltered the lad.

"You have read the Bible!" cried the astonished father. "And where
have you done that, you wicked boy?"

"At the bookstore of Mariano," confessed the trembling child.

"_Madre de Dios!_" burst from the father, as he started to his feet.
"Mariano is a wicked infidel! The Bishop shall hear of this! Ah, well
may the Holy Father in Rome grieve to see his innocent babes led
astray by these servants of hell! But, my son," returning to the boy
and clasping him again in his arms, "it is not too late. The Virgin
Mother has protected you. You meant no harm. Satan covets your pure
little soul--But he shall not have it!" The father's tremulous voice
mounted high, "No, by the Saints in heaven, he shall not have it!"

The boy's assurance slowly returned under the influence of his
father's tender solicitude, even though he remained dimly conscious of
the rift widening little by little between his parents' settled
convictions and his own groping thought. With the assuaging of his
grief came again those insistent questions which throughout his life
had tormented his peace and driven him even to the doors of infidels
in search of truth.

"Father," he began timidly, "why was I wicked to read the Bible?"

"Because, my son, in doing so you yielded to the temptations of Satan.
The Bible is a great and mysterious book, written by God himself. He
meant it to be explained to us by the Holy Father, who is the head of
the Church which the good Saint Peter founded. We are not great enough
nor good enough to understand it. The Holy Father, who cares for God's
Church on earth, he is good enough, and he alone can interpret it to
us. Satan tries to do with all men just what he did with you, my
child. He seeks to make them read the Bible so that he can confuse
them and rob them of their faith. Then when he gets possession of
their souls he drags them down with him to hell, where they are lost
forever."

"And does the Holy Father really believe that Mary is the mother of
God?" persisted the boy, raising his tear-stained face.

"Yes--is she not? The blessed Saviour said that he and God were one.
And, as Mary is the mother of Christ, she is also the mother of
God--is she not? Let us read what the good Saint John Chrysostom
says." He rose and went into another room, returning in a few minutes
with a little volume. Taking the boy again on his knee, he continued,
"The blessed Saint tells us that the Virgin Mary was made the mother
of God in order that she might obtain salvation for many who, on
account of their wicked lives, could not be saved, because they had so
offended divine justice, but yet, by the help of her sweet mercy and
mighty intercession, might be cleansed and rendered fit for heaven. My
little son, you have always been taught that Mary is heaven's Queen.
And so she is ours, and reigns in heaven for us. Jesus loves to have
her close to him, and he can never refuse her requests. He always
grants what she asks. And that is the reason why we pray to her. She
never forgets us--never!"

A troubled look crossed the boy's face. Then he began anew. "Father
dear, God made everything, did He not? The Bible says that, anyway."

"Yes, child."

"Did He make Satan?"

The father hesitated. The child hurried on under the lash of his holy
inquisitiveness. "Father, how did evil come into the world? Is God
both good and bad? And how can a good God punish us forever for sins
committed here in only a few short years?"

"Ah, _queridito_!" cried the harassed father. "Such questions should
not have entered your little head for years to come! Why can you not
run and play as do other children? Why are you not happy as they are?
Why must you spend your days thinking of things that are far too deep
for you? Can you not wait? Some day you shall know all. Some day, when
you have entered the service of God, perhaps you may even learn these
things from the Holy Father himself. Then you will understand how the
good God lets evil tempt us in order that our faith in Him may be
exercised and grow strong--"

"And He lets Satan harm us purposely?" The boy's innocent dark eyes
looked up appealingly into his father's face.

"It is only for a short time, little son. And only those who are never
fit for heaven go down with Satan. But you are not one of those," he
hastily added, straining the boy to him. "And the Masses which the
good priests say for us will lift us out of purgatory and into heaven,
where the streets are pure gold and the gates are pearl. And there we
will all live together for--"

"Father," interrupted the boy, "I have thought of these things for a
long, long time. I do not believe them. And I do not wish to become a
priest."

The father fell silent. It was one of those tense moments which every
man experiences when he sees a withering frost slowly gathering over
the fondest hopes of a lifetime. The family of Rincon, aristocratic,
intensely loyal to Church and State, had willingly laid itself upon
the sacrificial altar in deference to its honored traditions. Custom
had become law. Obedience of son to parent and parent to Sovereign,
spiritual or temporal, had been the guiding star of the family's
destinies. To think was lawful; but to hold opinions at variance with
tradition was unspeakable heresy. Spontaneity of action was
commendable; but conduct not prescribed by King or Pope was
unpardonable crime. Loss of fortune, of worldly power and prestige,
were as nothing; deviation from the narrow path trodden by the
illustrious scions of the great Juan was everything. That this lad, to
whom had descended the undying memories of a long line of glorious
defenders of kingly and papal power, should presume to shatter the
sacred Rincon traditions, was unbelievable. It was none other than the
work of Satan. The boy had fallen an innocent victim to the devil's
wiles.

But the house of Rincon had withstood the assaults of the son of
perdition for more than three centuries. It would not yield now! The
all-powerful Church of Rome stood behind it--and the gates of hell
could not prevail against her! The Church would save her own. Yes, the
father silently argued, through his brother's influence the case
should be laid before His Eminence, the Archbishop. And, if need be,
the Holy Father himself should be called upon to cast the devil out of
this tormented child. To argue with the boy now were futile, even
dangerous. The lad had grown up with full knowledge of his parents'
fond hopes for his future. He had never openly opposed them, although
at times the worried mother would voice her fears to the father when
her little son brought his perplexing questions to her and failed to
find satisfaction. But until this night the father had felt no alarm.
Indeed, he had looked upon the child's inquisitiveness as but a
logical consequence of his precocity and unusual mental powers, in
which he himself felt a father's swelling pride. To his thought it
augured rapid promotion in the Church; it meant in time a Cardinal's
hat. Ah, what glorious possibilities! How the prestige of the now
sunken family would soar! Happily he had been aroused to an
appreciation of the boy's really desperate state in time. The case
should go before the Archbishop to-morrow, and the Church should hear
his call to hasten to the rescue of this wandering lamb.




CHAPTER 4


Seville is called the heart of Spain. In a deeper sense it is her
soul. Within it, extremes touch, but only to blend into a harmonious
unit which manifests the Spanish temperament and character more truly
there than in any other part of the world. In its Andalusian
atmosphere the religious instinct of the Spaniard reaches its fullest
embodiment. True, its bull-fights are gory spectacles; but they are
also gorgeous and solemn ceremonies. Its _ferias_ are tremendously
worldly; but they are none the less stupendous religious _fetes_. Its
picturesque Easter processions, when colossal images of the Virgin are
carried among bareheaded and kneeling crowds, smack of paganism; but
we cannot question the genuineness of the religious fervor thus
displayed. Its Cathedral touches the _arena_; and its Archbishop
washes the feet of its old men. Its religion is still the living force
which unites and levels, exalts and debases. And its religion is
Rome.

On the fragrant spring morning following the discovery of the
execrated Voltaire, the little Jose, tightly clutching his father's
hand, threaded the narrow Sierpes and crossed the Prado de San
Sebastian, once the _Quemador_, where the Holy Inquisition was wont to
purge heresy from human souls with fire. The father shuddered, and his
stern face grew dark, as he thought of the revolting scenes once
enacted in that place in the name of Christ; and he inwardly voiced a
prayer of gratitude that the Holy Office had ceased to exist. Yet he
knew that, had he lived in that day, he would have handed his beloved
son over to that awful institution without demurral, rather than see
him develop those heretical views which were already rising from the
soil of his fertile, inquisitive mind.

The tinkling of a bell sounded down the street. Father and son quickly
doffed their hats and knelt on the pavement, while a priest, mounted
on a mule, rode swiftly past on his way to the bedside of a dying
communicant, the flickering lights and jingling bell announcing the
fact that he bore with him the Sacred Host.

"Please God, you will do the same some day, my son," murmured the
father. But the little Jose kept his eyes to the pavement, and would
make no reply.

Meanwhile, at a splendidly carved table in the library of his palatial
residence, surrounded by every luxury that wealth and ecclesiastical
influence could command, the Archbishop, pious shepherd of a restless
flock, sat with clouded brow and heavy heart. The festive ceremonials
of Easter were at hand, and the Church was again preparing to display
her chief splendors. But on the preceding Easter disturbances had
interrupted the processions of the Virgin; and already rumors had
reached the ears of the Archbishop of further trouble to be incited
during the approaching Holy Week by the growing body of skeptics and
anticlericals. To what extent these liberals had assumed the
proportions of a propaganda, and how active they would now show
themselves, were questions causing the holy man deep concern. Heavy
sighs escaped him as he voiced his fears to his sympathetic secretary
and associate, Rafael de Rincon, the gaunt, ascetic uncle of the
little Jose.

"Alas!" he murmured gloomily. "Since the day that our Isabella yielded
to her heretic ministers and thrust aside the good Sister Patrocinio,
Spain has been in a perilous state. After that unholy act the
dethronement and exile of the Queen were inevitable."

"True, Your Eminence," replied the secretary. "But is there no cause
for hope in the elevation of her son, Alfonso, to the throne?"

"He is but seventeen--and absent from Spain six years. He lacks the
force of his talented mother. And there is no longer a Sister
Patrocinio to command the royal ear."

"Unfortunate, I admit, Your Eminence. She bore the _stigmata_, the
very marks of our Saviour's wounds, imprinted on her flesh, and worked
his miracles. But, in Alfonso--"

"No, no," interrupted the Archbishop impatiently; "he has styled
himself the first Republican in Europe. He will make Catholicism the
state religion; but he will extend religious toleration to all. He is
consumptive in mind as well as in body. And the army--alas! what may
we look for from it when soldiers like this Polo Hernandez refuse to
kneel during the Mass?"

"The man has been arrested, Your Eminence," the secretary offered in
consolation.

"But the court-martial acquitted him!"

"True. Yet he has now been summoned before the supreme court in
Madrid."

The Archbishop's face brightened somewhat. "And the result--what think
you?"

The secretary shrugged his drooping shoulders. "They will condemn
him."

Yes, doubtless he would be condemned, for mediaevalism dies hard in
Spain. But the incident was portentous, and the Archbishop and his
keen secretary heard in it an ominous echo.

A servant appeared at the heavy portieres, and at a sign from the
secretary ushered Jose and his father into the august presence
awaiting them.

An hour later the pair emerged from the palace and started homeward.
His Eminence, rousing himself from the profound revery in which he had
been sunk for some moments, turned to his expectant secretary.

"A Luther in embryo!" he ejaculated.

"I feared as much, Your Eminence," returned the austere secretary.

"And yet, a remarkable intellect! Astonishing mental power! But all
tainted with the damnable so-called scientific spirit!"

"True, Your Eminence."

"But marked you not his deep reverence for God? And his sturdy
honesty? And how, despite his embarrassment, the religious zeal of his
soul shown forth?"

"He is morbidly honest, Your Grace."

"A trait I wish we might employ to our own advantage," mused the
churchman. Then, continuing, "He is learned far beyond his years.
Indeed, his questions put me to some stress--but only for the
difficulty of framing replies intelligible to a mind so immature," he
added hastily. "Either he feared my presence, or he is naturally
shrinking."

"He is so by nature, Your Eminence."

The Archbishop reflected. "Naive--pure--simple--mature, yet childish.
Have we covered the ground?"

"Not fully, Your Eminence. We omitted to mention his absorbing filial
devotion."

"True. And that, you tell me, is most pronounced."

"It is his strongest characteristic, Your Eminence. He has no will to
oppose it."

"Would that his devotion were for Holy Church!" sighed the Archbishop.

"I think it may be so directed, Your Eminence," quickly returned the
secretary.

"But--would he ever consent to enter the priesthood? And once in,
would he not prove a most dangerous element?"

The secretary made a deprecating gesture. "If I may suggest, such a
man as he promises to become is far more dangerous outside of the
Church than within, Your Eminence."

The Archbishop studied the man's face for a few moments. "There is
truth in your words, my friend. Yet how, think you, may he be
secured?"

"Your Eminence," replied the secretary warmly, "pardon these
suggestions in matters where you are far better fitted to pass sound
judgment than a humble servant of the Church like myself. But in this
case intimacy with my brother's family affords me data which may be
serviceable in bringing this matter to a conclusion. If I may be
permitted--"

The Archbishop nodded an unctuous and patronizing appreciation of his
elderly secretary's position, and the latter continued--

"Your Eminence, Holy Week is approaching, and we are beset with fears
lest the spirit of heresy which, alas! is abroad in our fair city,
shall manifest itself in such disturbances as may force us to abandon
these religious exercises in future. I need not point out the serious
nature of these demonstrations. Nor need I suggest that their relative
unimportance last year was due solely to lack of strong leadership.
Already our soldiers begin to refuse to kneel during the Mass. The
Holy Church is not yet called upon to display her weapons. But who
shall say to what measures she may not be forced when an able and
fearless leader shall arise among the heretics? To-day there has stood
before Your Eminence a lad possessing, in my opinion, the latent
qualifications for such leadership. I say, latent. I use the term
advisedly, for I know that he appears to manifest the Rincon lack of
decision. But so did I at his age. And who can say when the unfolding
of his other powers, now so markedly indicated, may not force the
development of those certain traits of character in which he now seems
deficient, but which, developed, would make him a power in the world?
Shall the Church permit this promising lad to stray from her, possibly
later to join issue with her enemies and use his great gifts to
propagate heresy and assault her foundations? Are we faithful to our
beloved Mother if we do not employ every means, foul or fair, to
destroy her enemies, even in the cradle? Remember, 'He who gains the
youth, possesses the future,' as the saying goes."

"Loyally spoken, faithful son," replied the Archbishop, shifting into
a more comfortable position. "And you suggest--?"

"This: that we wisely avail ourselves of his salient characteristics--his
weaknesses, if you wish--and secure him now to the Church."

"And, more specifically--?" with increasing animation.

"Your Eminence is already aware of the custom in our family of
consecrating the first-born son to the service of God. This boy has
been so consecrated from birth. It is the dearest hope of his parents.
At present their wishes are still his law. Their judgments yet
formulate his conduct. His sense of honor is acute. Your Eminence can
see that his word is sacred. His oath once taken would bind him
eternally. _It is for us to secure that oath!_"

"And how?" The Archbishop leaned forward eagerly.

"We, cooeperating with his parents, will cater to his consuming passion
for learning, and offer him the education which the limited resources
of his family cannot provide. We save him from the drudgery of
commercialism, and open to him the life of the scholar. We suggest to
him a career consecrated to study and holy service. The Church
educates him--he serves his fellow-men through her. Once ordained, his
character is such, I believe, that he could never become an apostate.
And, whatever his services to Holy Church may be thereafter, she at
least will have effectually disposed of a possible opponent. She has
all to gain, and nothing to lose by such procedure. Unless I greatly
mistake the Rincon character, the lad will yield to our inducements
and his mother's prayers, the charm of the Church and the bias of her
tutelage, and ultimately take the oath of ordination. After that--"

"My faithful adviser," interrupted the Archbishop genially, as visions
of the Cardinal's hat for eminent services hovered before him, "write
immediately to Monsignor, Rector of the _Seminario_, in Rome. Say that
he must at once receive, at our expense and on our recommendation, a
lad of twelve, who greatly desires to be trained for the priesthood."




CHAPTER 5


Thus did the Church open her arms to receive her wandering child. Thus
did her infallible wisdom, as expressed through her zealous agents in
Seville, essay to solve the perplexing problems of this agitated
little mind, and whisper to its confused throbbing, "Peace, be still."
The final disposition came to the boy not without some measure of
relief, despite, his protest. The long days of argument and pleading,
of assurance that within the Church he should find abundant and
satisfactory answers to his questions, and of explanations which he
was adjured to receive on faith until such time as he might be able to
prove their soundness, had utterly exhausted his sensitive little
soul, and left him without the combative energy or will for further
remonstrance.

Nor was the conflict solely a matching of his convictions against
the desires of his parents and the persuasions of the Archbishop and
his loyal secretary. The boy's hunger for learning alone might have
caused him to yield to the lure of a broad education. Moreover, his
nature contained not one element of commercialism. The impossibility
of entering the wine business with his father, or of spending his life
in physical toil for a bare maintenance, was as patent to himself,
even at that early age, as to his parents. His bent was wholly
intellectual. But he knew that his father could not afford him an
education. Yet this the Church now offered freely. Again, his nature
was essentially religious. The Church now extended all her learning,
all her vast resources, all her spiritual power, to develop and foster
this instinct. Nay, more, to protect and guide its development into
right channels.

The fact, too, that the little Jose was a child of extreme emotions
must not be overlooked in an estimate of the influences which bore
upon him during these trying days. His devotion to an object upon
which he had set his affections amounted to obsession. He adored his
parents--reverenced his father--worshiped his mother. The latter he
was wont to compare to the flowers, to the bright-plumed birds, to the
butterflies that hovered in the sunlight of their little _patio_. He
indited childish poems to her, and likened her in purity and beauty to
the angels and the Virgin Mary. Her slightest wish was his inflexible
law. Not that he was never guilty of childish faults of conduct, of
little whims of stubbornness and petulance; but his character rested
on a foundation of honesty, sincerity, and filial love that was never
shaken by the summer storms of naughtiness which at times made their
little disturbances above.

The parents breathed a sigh of relief when the tired child at last
bowed to their wishes and accepted the destiny thrust upon him. The
coming of a son to these loyal royalists and zealous Catholics had
meant the imposition of a sacred trust. That he was called to high
service in the Church of God was evidenced by Satan's early and
malicious attacks upon him. There was but one course for them to
pursue, and they did not for a moment question its soundness. To their
thought, this precocious child lacked the wisdom and balance which
comes only with years. The infallible Church, their all-wise spiritual
guide, supported their contentions. What they did was for her and for
the eternal welfare of the boy. Likewise, for the maintenance of
family pride and honor in a generation tainted with liberalism and
distrust of the sacred traditions.

The Church, on the other hand, in the august person of the Archbishop,
had accomplished a triumph. She had recognized the child's unusual
gifts of mind, and had been alert to the dangers they threatened. If
secured to herself, and their development carefully directed, they
would mold him into her future champion. If, despite her careful
weeding and pruning, they expanded beyond the limits which she set,
_they should be stifled_! The peculiar and complex nature of the child
offered her a tremendous advantage. For, if reactionary, his own
highly developed sense of honor, together with his filial devotion and
his intense family pride, should of themselves be forced to choke all
activity in the direction of apostasy and liberalism. Heaven knew, the
Church could not afford to neglect any action which promised to secure
for her a loyal son; or, failing that, at least effectually check in
its incipiency the development of a threatened opponent! Truly, as the
astute secretary had said, this boy might prove troublesome within the
fold; but he might also prove more dangerous without. Verily, it was
a triumph for the cause of righteousness! And after the final
disposition, the good Archbishop had sat far into the night in the
comfort of his _sanctum_, drowsing over his pleasant meditations on
the rewards which his unflagging devotion to the cause of Holy Church
was sure some day to bring.

Time sped. The fragrant Sevillian spring melted into summer, and
summer merged with fall. The Rincon family was adjusting itself to the
turn in the career of its heir, the guardian and depository of its
revived hopes. During the weeks which intervened between his first
interview with the Archbishop and his final departure for Rome, Jose
had been carefully prepared by his uncle, who spared no effort to
stimulate in the boy a proper appreciation of his high calling. He was
taught that as a priest of the Holy Catholic Church he would become a
representative of the blessed Christ among men. His mission would be
to carry on the Saviour's work for the salvation of souls, and, with
the power of Christ and in His name, to instruct mankind in true
beliefs and righteous conduct. He would forgive sins, impose
penalties, and offer sacrificial atonement in the body of the
Saviour--in a word, he was to become _sacerdos alter Christus_,
another Christ. His training for this exalted work would cover a
period of six or eight years, perhaps longer, and would fit him to
become a power among men, a conserver of the sacred faith, and an
ensample of the highest morality.

"Ah, _sobrinito_," the sharp-visaged, gray-haired uncle had said,
"truly a fortunate boy are you to hear this grandest of opportunities
knocking at your door! A priest--a God! Nay, even more than God, for
as priest God gives you power over Himself!"

The boy's wondering eyes widened, and a look of mingled confusion and
astonishment came into his wan face. "I do not see, _tio mio_--I do
not see," he murmured.

"But you shall, you shall! And you shall understand the awful
responsibility which God thus reposes upon you, when He gives you
power to do greater things than He did when He created the world. You
shall command the Christ, and He shall come down at your bidding. Ah,
_chiquito_, a fortunate boy!" But the lad turned wearily away, without
sharing his uncle's enthusiasm.

The day before his departure Jose was again conducted before the
Archbishop, and after listening to a lengthy resume of what the Church
was about to do for him, and what she expected in return, two solemn
vows were exacted from him--

"First," announced the uncle, in low, deliberate tones, "you will
solemnly promise your mother and your God that, daily praying to be
delivered from the baneful influences which now cause doubt and
questioning in your mind, and refraining from voicing them to your
teachers or fellow-students, you will strive to accept all that is
taught you in Rome, deferring every endeavor to prove the teachings
you are to receive until the end of your long course, when, by
training and discipline, you shall have so developed in goodness,
purity, and power, that you shall be found worthy to receive spiritual
confirmation of the great tenets upon which the Holy Roman Catholic
Church has been founded and reared."

He paused for a moment to catch his breath and let his portentous
words sink into the quivering brain of the lad before him. Then he
resumed--

"Second, keeping ever in mind your debt of gratitude to the Church,
you promise faithfully to finish your course, and at the end offer
yourself to the service of God in the holy priesthood."

The solemn hush that lay over the room when he finished was broken
only by the muffled sobs of the mother.

Tender in years, plunged into grief at the impending separation from
home and all that he held dear, the boy knelt before the secretary and
gave his trembling word to observe these obligations. Then, after he
had kissed the Bible and the Archbishop's extended hand, he threw
himself upon the floor in a torrent of tears.

On the following morning, a bright, sparkling November day, the little
Jose, spent with emotion, tore himself from his mother's clinging
embrace and set out for Rome, accompanied by his solicitous uncle.

"And, _queridito_," were the mother's last words, "I have your promise
that never will you voluntarily leave the Church?"

The appeal which his beseeching look carried back to her was not
granted. He slowly bowed his acquiescence, and turned away. A week
later he had entered upon the retreat with which the school year opens
in the _Seminario_.




CHAPTER 6


Rome, like a fallen gladiator, spent and prostrate on the Alban
hills, still awaits the issue of the conflict between the forces of
life and death within. Dead, where the blight of pagan and mediaeval
superstition has eaten into the quivering tissues; it lives where
the pulsing current of modernism expands its shrunken arteries and
bears the nourishing truth. Though eternal in tradition and
colossal in material achievement, the glory of the Imperial City
nevertheless rests on a foundation of perishable human ambitions,
creeds, and beliefs, manifested outwardly for a time in brilliant
deeds, great edifices, and comprehensive codes, but always bearing
within themselves the seeds of their own decay. No trophy brought to
her gates in triumph by the Caesars ever approached in worth the
simple truth with which Paul of Tarsus, chained to his jailer,
illumined his gloomy dungeon. Had the religious principles which he
and his devoted associates labored so unselfishly to impart to a
benighted world for its own good been recognized by Rome as the
"pearl without price," she would have built upon them as foundation
stones a truer glory, and one which would have drawn the nations of
the earth to worship within her walls. But Rome, in her master,
Constantine, saw only the lure of a temporal advantage to be gained
by fettering the totally misunderstood teachings of Jesus with the
shackles of organized politics. From this unhallowed marriage of
religion and statecraft was born that institution unlike either
parent, yet exhibiting modified characteristics of each, the Holy
Church. To this institution, now mighty in material riches and
power, but still mediaeval in character, despite the assaults of
centuries of progress, a combination of political maneuver, bigotry,
and weakness committed the young Jose, tender, sensitive, receptive,
and pure, to be trained as an agent to further its world-embracing
policies.

The retreat upon which the boy at once entered on his arrival at
the seminary extended over ten days. During this time there were
periods of solitary meditation--hours when his lonely heart cried out
in anguish for his beloved mother--visits to the blessed sacrament,
recitations of the office, and consultations with his spiritual
advisers, at which times his promises to his parents and the
Archbishop, coupled with his natural reticence and the embarrassment
occasioned by his strange environment, sealed his lips and prevented
the voicing of his honest questions and doubts. It was sought
through this retreat to so bring the lad under the influence of the
great religious teachings as to most deeply impress his heart and
mind with the importance of the seminary training upon which he had
entered. His day began with the dreaded meditation at five in the
morning, followed by hearing the Mass and receiving Communion. It
closed, after study and class work, with another visit to the blessed
sacrament, recital of the Rosary, spiritual reading, and prayer. On
Sundays he assisted at solemn High Mass in the church of the
_Seminario Pio_. One day a week was a holiday; but only in the
sense that it was devoted to visiting hospitals and charitable
institutions, in order to acquire practical experience and a
foretaste of his future work among the sick and needy. Clad in his
little violet cassock, low-crowned, three-cornered hat, and
_soprana_, he might be seen on these holidays trotting along with
his fellow-students in the wake of their superior, his brow
generally contracted, and his childish face seldom lighted by a happy
smile.

The first year passed without special incident. The boy, filled with
that quenchless ambition to know, which characterizes the finest
minds, entered eagerly upon his studies and faithfully observed his
promises. If his tender soul warped and his fresh, receptive mind
shriveled under the religious tutelage he received, no one but himself
knew it, not even his fond mother, as she clasped him again in her
arms when he returned home for the first summer vacation. With the
second year there began studies of absorbing interest to the boy, and
the youthful mind fed hungrily. This seemed to have the effect of
expanding somewhat his self-contained little soul. He appeared to grow
out of himself to a certain extent, to become less timid, less
reticent, even more sociable; and when he returned to Seville again at
the close of the year he had apparently lost much of the somberness of
disposition which had previously characterized him. The Archbishop
examined him closely; but the boy, speaking little, gave no hint of
the inner working of his thought; and if his soul seethed and
fermented within, the Rincon pride and honor covered it with a placid
demeanor and a bearing of outward calm. When the interview ended and
the lad had departed, the Archbishop descended to the indignity of
roundly slapping his ascetic secretary on his emaciated back, as an
indication of triumphant joy. The boy certainly was being charmed into
deep devotion to the Church! He was fast being bound to her altars!
Again the glorious spectacle of the Church triumphant in molding a
wavering youth into a devoted son!

Four years passed thus, almost in silence on the boy's part. Yet his
character suffered little change. At home he strove to avoid all
mention of the career upon which he was entering, although he gave
slight indication of dissatisfaction with it. He was punctilious in
his attendance upon religious services; but to have been otherwise
would have brought sorrow to his proud, happy parents. His days were
spent in complete absorption in his books, or in writing in his
journal. The latter he had begun shortly before entering the seminary,
and it was destined to exert a profound influence upon his life. Often
his parents would playfully urge him to read to them from it; but the
boy, devotedly obedient and filial in every other respect steadfastly
begged permission to refuse these requests. In that little whim the
fond parents humored him, and he was left largely alone to his books
and his meditations.

During Jose's fourth summer vacation a heavy sorrow suddenly fell upon
him and plunged him into such an excess of grief that it was feared
his mind would give way. His revered father, advanced in years, and
weakened by overwork and business worries, succumbed to the malaria so
prevalent in Seville during the hot months and passed away, after a
brief illness. The blow descended with terrific force upon the
morbidly disposed lad. It was his first intimate experience with
death. For days after the solemn events of the mourning and funeral he
sat as one stunned, holding his mother's hand and staring dumbly into
space; or for hours paced to and fro in the little _patio_, his face
rigidly set and his eyes fixed vacantly on the ground beneath. The
work of four years in opening his mind, in expanding his thought, in
drawing him out of his habitual reticence and developing within him
the sense of companionship and easy tolerance, was at one stroke
rendered null. Brought face to face with the grim destroyer, all the
doubt and confusion of former years broke the bounds which had held
them in abeyance and returned upon him with increased insistence.
Never before had he felt so keenly the impotence of mortal man and the
futility of worldly strivings. Never had he seen so clearly the fatal
defects in the accepted interpretation of Christ's mission on earth.
His earlier questionings returned in violent protests against the
emptiness of the beliefs and formalities of the Church. In times past
he had voiced vague and dimly outlined perceptions of her spiritual
needs. But now to him these needs had suddenly taken definite form.
Jesus had healed the sick of all manner of disease. He himself was
being trained to represent the Christ on earth. Would he, too, be
taught to heal the sick as the Master had done? The blessed Saviour
said, "The works that I do, ye shall do also." But the priests, his
representatives, clearly were not doing the works of the Master. And
if he himself had been an ordained priest at the time of his father's
death, could he have saved him? No, he well knew that he could not.
And yet he would have been the Saviour's representative among men.
Alas! how poor a one he well knew.

In his stress of mind he sought his uncle, and by him was again led
before the Archbishop. His reticence and timidity dispersed by his
great sorrow, the distraught boy faced the high ecclesiastic with
questions terribly blunt.

"Why, my Father, after four years in the _Seminario_, am I not being
taught to do the works which our blessed Saviour did?"

The placid Archbishop stared at the boy in dumb astonishment. Again,
after years of peace that had promised quiescence on these mooted
points! Well, he must buckle on his armor--if indeed he had not
outgrown it quite--and prepare to withstand anew the assaults of the
devil!

"H'm!--to be specific, my son--you mean--?" The great man was
sparring.

"Why do we not heal the sick as he did?" the boy explained tersely.

"Ah!" The peace-loving man of God breathed easier. How simple! The
devil was firing a cracked blunderbuss.

"My son," he advanced with paternal unction, "you have been taught--or
should have been, ere this--that the healing miracles of our blessed
Saviour belong to a dispensation long past. They were special signs
from God, given at the time of establishing His Church on earth, to
convince an incredulous multitude. They are not needed now. We
convince by logic and reason and by historical witnesses to the deeds
of the Saints and our blessed Saviour." As he pronounced this sacred
name the holy man devoutly crossed himself. "Men would believe no more
readily to-day," he added easily, "even if they should see miracles of
healing, for they would attribute them to the human mentality, to
suggestion, hypnotism, hallucination, and the like. Even the mighty
deeds of Christ were attributed to Beelzebub." The complacent Father
settled back into his chair with an air of having disposed for all
time of the mooted subject of miracles.

"That begs the question, my Father!" returned the boy quickly and
excitedly. "And as I read church history it is thus that the question
has been begged ever since the first century!"

"What!" The Archbishop was waxing hot. "Do you, a mere child of
sixteen, dare to dispute the claims of Holy Church?"

"My Father," the boy spoke slowly and with awful earnestness, "I have
been four years in the _Seminario_. I do not find the true Christ
there; nor do I think I shall find him within the Church."

"_Sanctissima Maria!_" The Archbishop bounded to his feet "Have you
sold yourself to the devil?" he exploded. "Have you fed these years at
the warm breasts of the Holy Mother, only to turn now and rend her?
Have you become a Protester? Apostate and forsworn!"

"My Father," the boy returned calmly, "did Jesus tell the truth--or
did he lie? If he spoke truth, then I think he is _not_ in the
Church to-day. She has wholly misunderstood him--or else she--she
deliberately falsifies."

The Archbishop sank gasping into his chair.

Jose went on. "You call me apostate and forsworn. I am neither. One
cannot become apostate when he has never believed. As to being
forsworn--I am a Rincon!"

The erect head and flashing eyes of the youth drew an involuntary
exclamation of approval from the anxious secretary, who had stood
striving to evolve from his befuddled wits some course adequate to the
strained situation.

But the boy's proud bearing was only momentary. The wonted look of
troubled wistfulness again settled over his face, and his shoulders
bent to their accustomed stoop, as if his frail body were slowly
crushing beneath a tremendous burden.

"My Father," he continued sadly, "do not the Gospels show that Jesus
proved the truth of all he taught by doing the works which we call
miracles? But does the Church to-day by any great works prove a single
one of her teachings? You say that Christianity no longer needs the
healing of the sick in order to prove its claims. I answer that, if
so, it likewise no longer needs the preaching of the gospel, for I
cannot find that Jesus made any distinction between the two. Always he
coupled one with the other. His command was ever, 'Preach the gospel,
heal the sick!' His works of healing were simply signs which showed
that he understood what he taught. They were his proofs, and they
followed naturally his great understanding of God. But what proofs do
you offer when you ask mankind to accept your preaching? Jesus said,
'He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also.' If
you do not do the works which he did, it shows plainly that you do not
believe on him--that is, that you do not understand him. When I am an
ordained priest, and undertake to preach the gospel to the world, must
I confess to my people that I cannot prove what I am teaching? Must I
confess that there is no proof within the Church? Is it not so, that
true believers in Jesus Christ believe exactly in the proportion in
which they obey him and do his works?"

The boy paused for breath. The Archbishop and his secretary sat
spellbound before him. Then he resumed--

"How the consecrated wafer through the words of a priest becomes the
real body of Christ, I am as yet unable to learn. I do not believe it
does. How priests can grant absolution for sins when, to me, sins are
forgiven only when they are forsaken, I have not been taught. I do not
believe they can. The Church assumes to teach these things, but it
cannot prove them. From the great works of Jesus and his apostles it
has descended to the blessing of _milagros_ and candles, to the
worship of the Virgin and man-made Saints, to long processions, to
show and glitter--while without her doors the poor, the sick and the
dying stretch out their thin, white hands and beseech her to save
them, not from hell or purgatory in a supposed life to come, but from
misery, want and ignorance right here in this world, as Jesus told his
followers they should do. If you can show forth the omnipotence of God
by healing the sick and raising the dead, I could accept that as proof
of your understanding of the teachings of Jesus--and what you _really_
understand you can demonstrate and teach to others. Theological
questions used to bother me, but they do so no longer. Holy oil, holy
water, blessed candles, incense, images and display do not interest me
as they did when a child, nor do they any longer seem part of an
intelligent worship of God. But"--his voice rising in animation--"to
touch the blind man's eyes and see them open; to bid the leper be
clean, and see his skin flush with health--ah! that is to worship God
in spirit and in truth--that is to prove that you understand what
Jesus taught and are obeying, not part, but _all_ of his commands. I
am not apostate"--he concluded sadly--"I never did fully believe that
the religion of Jesus is the religion which the Church to-day preaches
and pretends to practice. I do not believe in her heaven, her
purgatory or her hell, nor do I believe that her Masses move God to
release souls from torment. I do not believe in her powers to pardon
and curse. I do not believe in her claims of infallibility. But--"

He hesitated a moment, as if not quite sure of his ground. Then his
face glowed with sudden eagerness, and he cried, "My Father, the
Church needs the light--do you not see it?--do you not, my uncle?"
turning appealingly to the hard-faced secretary. "Can we not work to
help her, and through her reach the world? Should not the Church
rightly be the greatest instrument for good? But how can she teach the
truth when she herself is so filled with error? How can she preach the
gospel when she knows not what the gospel is? But Jesus said that if
we obeyed him we should know of the doctrine, should know the true
meaning of the gospel. But we must first obey. We must not only
preach, but we must become spiritually minded enough to heal the
sick--"

"_Dios nos guarde!_" interrupted the Archbishop, attempting to rise,
but prevented by his secretary, who laid a restraining hand on his
arm. The latter then turned to the overwrought boy.

"My dear Jose," he said, smiling patronizingly upon the youth,
although his cold eyes glittered like bits of polished steel, "His
Eminence forgives your hasty words, for he recognizes your earnestness,
and, moreover, is aware how deeply your heart is lacerated by your
recent bereavement. But, further--and I say this in confidence to
you--His Eminence and I have discussed these very matters to which you
refer, and have long seen the need of certain changes within the
Church which will redound to her glory and usefulness. And you must know
that the Holy Father in Rome also recognizes these needs, and sees,
too, the time when they will be met. However, his great wisdom
prevents him from acting hastily. You must remember that our blessed
Saviour suffered many things to be so for the time, although he knew
they would be altered in due season. So it is with the Church. Her
children are not all deep thinkers, like yourself, but are for the most
part poor and ignorant people, who could not understand your high
views. They must be led in ways with which they are familiar until
they can be lifted gradually to higher planes of thought and conduct.
Is it not so? You are one who will do much for them, my son--but you
will accomplish nothing by attempting suddenly to overthrow the
established traditions which they reverence, nor by publicly prating
about the Church's defects. Your task will be to lead them gently,
imperceptibly, up out of darkness into the light, which, despite your
accusations, _does_ shine in the Church, and is visible to all who
rightly seek it. You have yet four years in the _Seminario_. You gave
us your promise--the Rincon word--that you would lay aside these
doubts and questionings until your course was completed. We do not
hold you--_but you hold yourself to your word_! Our sincere advice
is that you keep your counsel, and silently work with us for the Church
and mankind. The Church will offer you unlimited opportunities for
service. She is educating you. Indeed, has she not generously given you
the very data wherewith you are enabled now to accuse her? You will
find her always the same just, tolerant, wise Mother, leading her
children upward as fast as they are able to journey. Her work is
universal, and she is impervious to the shafts of envy, malice, and
hatred which her enemies launch at her. She has resources of which you
as yet know nothing. In the end she will triumph. You are offered an
opportunity to contribute toward that triumph and to share in it.
His Eminence knows that you will not permit Satan to make you reject
that offer now."

The secretary's sharp, beady eyes looked straight into those of the
youth, and held him. His small, round head, with its low brow and
grizzled locks, waved snake-like on the man's long neck. His tall
form, in its black cassock, bent over the lad like a spectre. His
slender arms, of uncanny length, waved constantly before him; and the
long, bony fingers seemed to reach into the boy's very soul and choke
the springs of life at their origin. His reasoning took the form of
suggestion, bearing the indisputable stamp of authority. Again, the
boy, confused and uncertain, bowed before years and worldly
experience, and returned to his solitude and the companionship of his
books and his writing.

"Occupy till I come," the patient Master had tenderly said. From
earliest boyhood Jose had heard this clarion call within his soul. And
striving, delving, plodding, he had sought to obey--struggling toward
the distant gleam, toward the realization of something better and
nearer the Master's thought than the childish creeds of his
fellow-men--something warmer, more vital than the pulseless decrees of
ecumenical councils--something to solve men's daily problems here on
earth--something to heal their diseases of body and soul, and lift
them into that realm of spiritual thinking where material pleasures,
sensations, and possessions no longer form the single aim and
existence of mankind, and life becomes what in reality it is, eternal
ecstasy! The Christ had promised! And Jose would occupy and wait in
faith until, with joy inexpressible, he should behold the shining form
of the Master at the door of his opened tomb.

"With Your Eminence's permission I will accompany the boy back to
Rome," the secretary said one day, shortly before Jose's return to the
seminary. "I will consult with the Rector, and suggest that certain
and special tutelage be given the lad. Let them bring their powers of
reasoning and argument to bear upon him, to the end that his thinking
may be directed into proper channels before it is too late. _Hombre!_"
he muttered, as with head bent and hands clasped behind his back he
slowly paced before the Archbishop. "To think that he is a Rincon! And
yet, but sixteen--a babe--a mere babe!"




CHAPTER 7


It must have been, necessarily, a very complex set of causes that
could lay hold on a boy so really gifted as Jose de Rincon and,
against his instincts and, on the part of those responsible for the
deed, with the certain knowledge of his disinclination, urge him into
the priesthood of a religious institution with which congenitally he
had but little in common.

To begin with, the bigoted and selfish desires of his parents found in
the boy's filial devotion a ready and sufficient means of compelling
him to any sacrifice of self. Only a thorough understanding of the
Spanish temperament will enable one to arrive at a just estimate of
Jose's character, and the sacredness of the promises given his mother.
Though the child might pine and droop like a cankered rosebud, yet he
would never cease to regard the sanctity of his oath as eternally
binding. And the mother would accept the sacrifice, for her love for
her little son was clouded by her great ambitions in respect to his
earthly career, and her genuine solicitude for his soul's eternal
welfare.

Family tradition, sacred and inviolable, played its by no means
small part in this affair. Custom, now as inviolable as the Jewish
law, decreed that the first-born son should sink his individuality
into that of the Mother Church. And to the Spaniard, _costumbre_
is law. Again, the vacillating and hesitant nature of the boy
himself contributed largely to the result; for, though supremely
gifted in receptivity and broadness of mind, in critical analysis
and keenness of perception, he nevertheless lacked the energy of will
necessary to the shaping of a life-course along normal lines. The boy
knew what he preferred, yet he said _Amen_ both to the prayers of
his parents and the suggestions of doubt which his own mind offered.
He was weakest where the greatest firmness was demanded. His love
of study, his innate shrinking from responsibility, and his
repugnance toward discord and strife--in a word, his lack of
fighting qualities--naturally caused him to seek the lines of least
resistance, and thus afforded a ready advantage to those who sought
to influence him.

But why, it may be asked, such zeal on the part of the Archbishop and
his secretary in forcing upon the boy a career to which they knew he
was disinclined? Why should loyal agents of the Church so tirelessly
urge into the priesthood one who might prove a serpent in her bosom?

The Archbishop may be dismissed from this discussion. That his motives
were wholly above the bias of worldly ambition, we may not affirm. Yet
we know that he was actuated by zeal for the Church; that he had its
advancement, its growth in power and prestige always at heart. And we
know that he would have rejoiced some day to boast, "We have saved to
the Church a brilliant son who threatened to become a redoubtable
enemy." The forces operating for and against this desideratum seemed
to him about equally matched. The boy was still very young. His mind
was as yet in the formative period, and would be for some years. If
the Church could secure her hold upon him during this period she would
doubtless retain it for all time; for, as the sagacious secretary so
often quoted to his superior, "Once a priest, always a priest,"
emphasizing the tenet that the character imprinted by ordination is
ineffaceable.

As for the secretary, he was a Rincon, proud and bigoted, and withal
fanatically loyal to the Church as an institution, whatever its or
his own degree of genuine piety. It was deeply galling to his
ecclesiastical pride to see the threatened development of heretical
tendencies in a scion of his house. These were weeds which must
and should be choked, cost what it might! To this end any means were
justified, for "What doth it profit a man to gain the whole world
and lose his own soul?" And the Rincon soul had been molded centuries
ago. The secretary hated the rapidly developing "scientific" spirit
of the age and the "higher criticism" with a genuine and deadly
hatred. His curse rested upon all modern culture. To him, the Jesuit
college at Rome had established the level of intellectual freedom.
He worshiped the landmarks which the Fathers had set, and he would
have opposed their removal with his life. No, the Rincon traditions
must be preserved at whatever cost! The heretical buddings within Jose
should be checked; he should enter the priesthood; his thinking
should be directed into proper channels; his mind should be bent into
conformity with Holy Church! If not--but there was no alternative.
The all-powerful Church could and would accomplish it.

In the choice of Rafael de Rincon as secretary and assistant, the
Archbishop had secured to himself a man of vast knowledge of
ecclesiastical matters, of great acumen, and exceptional ability. The
man was a Jesuit, and a positive, dynamic representative of all that
the order stands for. He was now in his sixty-eighth year, but as
vigorous of mind and body as if he bore but half his burden of age.
For some years prior to his connection with the See of Seville he had
served in the royal household at Madrid. But, presumably at the
request of Queen Isabella, he had been peremptorily summoned to Rome
some three years before her exile; and when he again left the Eternal
City it was with the tentative papal appointment to Seville.

Just why Padre Rafael had been relieved of his duties in Madrid was
never divulged. But gossip supplied the paucity of fact with the usual
delectable speculations, the most persistent of which had to do with
the rumored birth of a royal child. The deplorable conduct of the
Queen after her enforced marriage to Don Francisco D'Assis had thrown
the shadow of suspicion on the legitimacy of all her children; and
when it began to be widely hinted that Padre Rafael, were he so
disposed, might point to a humble cottage in the sunlit hills of
Granada where lay a tiny _Infanta_, greatly resembling the famous
singer and favorite of the Queen, Marfori, Marquis de Loja, Isabella's
alarm was sufficient to arouse the Vatican to action. With the removal
of Padre Rafael, and the bestowal of the "_Golden Rose of Faith and
Virtue_" upon the Queen by His Holiness, Pio Nono, the rumor quickly
subsided, and was soon forgotten.

Whether because of this supposed secret Padre Rafael was in favor at
the court of Pio Nono's successor, we may not say. The man's character
was quite enigmatical, and divulged nothing. But, if we may again
appeal to rumor, he did appear to have influence in papal circles. And
we are not sure that he did not seek to augment that influence by
securing his irresolute little nephew to the Church. And yet, the
sincerity of his devotion to the papacy cannot be questioned, as
witness his services to Pius IX., "the first Christian to achieve
infallibility," during the troublesome years of 1870-71, when the
French _debacle_ all but scuttled the papal ship of state. And if now
he sought to use his influence at the Vatican, we shall generously
attribute it to his loyalty to Rincon traditions, and his genuine
concern for the welfare of the little Jose, rather than to any desire
to advance his own ecclesiastical status.

But, it may be asked, during the eight years of Jose's course in the
seminary, did his tutors not mark the forces at work in the boy's
soul? And if so, why did they not urge his dismissal as unfit for the
calling of the priesthood?

Because, true to his promises, and stubbornly hugging the fetish of
family pride, the boy gave but little indication during the first four
years of his course of the heretical doubts and disbeliefs fermenting
within his troubled mind. And when, after the death of his father and
its consequent release of the flood of protest and mental disquiet so
long pent up within him, the uncle returned to Rome with the lad to
advise his instructors to bring extra pressure to bear upon him in
order to convince him of the truths upon which the Church rested, Jose
subsided again into his wonted attitude of placid endurance, even of
partial acceptance of the religious tutelage, and seldom gave further
sign of inner discord. Acting upon the suggestions of the uncle,
Jose's instructors took special pains to parade before him the
evidence and authorities supporting the claims of Holy Church and the
grand tenets upon which the faith reposed. In particular were the
arguments of Cardinal Newman cited to him, and the study of the
latter's Apology was made a requirement of his course. The writings of
the great Cardinal Manning also were laid before him, and he was told
to find therein ample support for all assumptions of the Church.

Silently and patiently the boy to outward appearance acquiesced; but
often the light of his midnight candle might have revealed a wan face,
frowning and perplexed, while before him lay the Cardinal's argument
for belief in the miraculous resuscitation of the Virgin Mary--the
argument being that the story is a beautiful one, and a comfort to
those pious souls who think it true!

Often, too, there lay before him the words of the great Newman:

  "You may be taken away young; you may live to fourscore; you may
  die in your bed, or in the open field--but if Mary intercedes for
  you, that day will find you watching and ready. All things will be
  fixed to secure your salvation, all dangers will be foreseen, all
  obstacles removed, all aid provided."

And as often he would close the book and drop his head in wonder that
a man so humanly great could believe in an infinite, omnipotent God
amenable to influence, even to that of the sanctified Mary.

"The Christ said, 'These signs shall follow them that believe,'" he
sometimes murmured, as he sat wrapped in study. "But do the Master's
signs follow the Cardinals? Yet these men say they believe. What can
they do that other men can not? Alas, nothing! What boots their
sterile faith?"

The limitations with which the lad was hedged about in the _Seminario_
quite circumscribed his existence there. All lay influences were
carefully excluded, and he learned only what was selected for him
by his teachers. Added to this narrowing influence was his promise
to his mother that he would read nothing proscribed by the Church. Of
Bible criticism, therefore, he might know nothing. For original
investigation of authorities there was neither permission nor
opportunity. He was taught to discount historical criticism, and to
regard anarchy as the logical result of independence of thought.
He was likewise impressed with the fact that he must not question the
official acts of Holy Church.

"But," he once remonstrated, "it was by an ecumenical council--a group
of frail human beings--that the Pope was declared infallible! And that
only a few years ago!"

"The council but set its seal of affirmation to an already great and
established fact," was the reply. "As the supreme teacher and definer
of the Church of God no Pope has ever erred, nor ever can err, in the
exposition of revealed truth."

"But Tito Cennini said in class but yesterday that many of the Popes
had been wicked men!"

"You must learn to distinguish, my son, between the man and the
office. No matter what the private life of a Pope may have been, the
validity of his official acts is not thereby affected. Nor is the
doctrine of the Church."

"But,--"

"Nay, my son; this is what the Church teaches; and to slight it is to
emperil your soul."

But, despite his promises to his mother and the Archbishop, and in
despite, too, of his own conscientious endeavor to keep every
contaminating influence from entering his mind, he could not prevent
this same Tito from assiduously cultivating his friendship, and
voicing the most liberal and worldly opinions to him.

"_Perdio_, but you are an ignorant animal, Jose!" ejaculated the
little rascal one day, entering Jose's room and throwing himself upon
the bed. "Why, didn't you know that the Popes used to raise money by
selling their pardons and indulgences? That fellow Tetzel, back in
Luther's time, rated sacrilege at nine ducats, murder at seven,
witchcraft at six, and so on. Ever since the time of Innocent VIII.
immunity from purgatory could be bought. It was his chamberlain who
used to say, 'God willeth not the death of a sinner, but that he
should pay and live.' Ha! ha! Those were good old days, _amico mio_!"

But the serious Jose, to whom honor was a sacred thing, saw not his
companion's cause for mirth. "Tito," he hazarded, "our instructor
tells us that we must distinguish--"

"Ho! ho!" laughed the immodest Tito, "if the Apostolic virtue has been
handed down from the great Peter through the long line of Bishops of
Rome and later Popes, what happened to it when there were two or three
Popes, in the Middle Ages? And which branch retained the unbroken
succession? Of a truth, _amico_, you are very credulous!"

Jose looked at him horrified.

"And which branch now," continued the irrepressible Tito, "holds a
monopoly of the Apostolic virtue, the Anglican Church, the Greek, or
the Roman Catholic? For each claims it, and each regards its rival
claimants as rank heretics."

Jose could not but dwell long and thoughtfully on this. Then, later,
he again sought the graceless Tito. "_Amico_," he said eagerly, "why
do not these claimants of the true Apostolic virtue seek to prove
their claims, instead of, like pouting children, vainly spending
themselves in denouncing their rivals?"

"_Prove them!_" shouted Tito. "And how, _amico mio_?"

"Why," returned Jose earnestly, "by doing the works the Apostles did;
by healing the sick, and raising the dead, and--"

Tito answered with a mocking laugh. "_Perdio, amico!_ know you not
that if they submitted to such proof not one of the various
contestants could substantiate his claims?"

"Then, oh, then how could the council declare the Pope to be
infallible?"

Tito regarded his friend pityingly. "My wonder is, _amico_," he
replied seriously, "that they did not declare him _immortal_ as well.
When you read the true history of those exciting days and learn
something of the political intrigue with which the Church was then
connected, you will see certain excellent reasons why the Holy Father
should have been declared infallible. But let me ask you, _amico_, if
you have such doubts, why are you here, of all places? Surely it is
not your own life-purpose to become a priest!"

"My life-purpose," answered Jose meditatively, "is to find my soul--my
_real_ self."

Tito went away shaking his head. He could not understand such a
character as that of Jose. But, for that matter, no one ever
fathoms a fellow-being. And so we who have attempted a sketch of
the boy's mentality will not complain if its complexity prevents
us from adequately setting it forth. Rather shall we feel that we
have accomplished much if we have shown that the lad had no slight
justification for the budding seeds of religious doubt within his
mind, and for concluding that of the constitution of God men
know nothing, despite their fantastical theories and their bold
affirmations, as if He were a man in their immediate neighborhood,
with whom they were on the most intimate terms.

In the course of time Jose found the companionship of Tito increasingly
unendurable, and so he welcomed the formation of another friendship
among his mates, even though it was with a lad much older than himself,
Bernardo Damiano, a candidate for ordination, and one thoroughly
indoctrinated in the faith of Holy Church. With open and receptive
heart our young Levite eagerly availed himself of his new friend's
voluntary discourses on the mooted topics about which his own thought
incessantly revolved.

"Fear not, Jose, to accept all that is taught you here," said Bernardo
in kindly admonition; "for if this be not the very doctrine of the
Christ himself, where else will you find it? Among the Protesters?
Nay, they have, it is true, hundreds of churches; and they call
themselves Christians. But their religion is as diverse as their
churches are numerous, and it is not of God or Jesus Christ. They have
impiously borrowed from us. Their emasculated creeds are only
assumptions of human belief. They recognize no law of consistency, and
so they enjoy unbridled license. They believe what they please, and
each interprets Holy Writ to suit his own fantastical whims."

"But, the Popes--" began Jose, returning again to his troublesome
topic.

"Yes, and what of them?" replied his friend calmly. "Can you not see
beyond the human man to the Holy Office? The Holy Father is the
successor of the great Apostle Peter, whom our blessed Saviour
appointed his Vicar on earth, and constituted the supreme teacher and
judge in matters of morals. Remember, _Jesus Christ founded the
Catholic religion_! He established the Church, which he commanded all
men to support and obey. That Church is still, and always will be, the
infallible teacher of truth, for Jesus declared that it should never
fall. Let not Satan lead you to the Protesters, Jose, for their creeds
are but snares and pitfalls."

"I know nothing of Protestant creeds, nor want to," answered Jose. "If
Jesus Christ established the Catholic religion, then I want to accept
it, and shall conclude that my doubts and questionings are but the
whisperings of Satan. But--"

"But what, my friend? The Popes again?" Bernardo laughed, and put his
arm affectionately about the younger lad. "The Pope, Jose, is, always
has been, and always will be, supreme, crowned with the triple crown
as king of earth, and heaven, and hell. We mortals have not made him
so. Heaven alone did that. God himself made our Pontiff of the Holy
Catholic Church superior even to the angels; and if it were possible
for them to believe contrary to the faith, he could judge them and lay
the ban of excommunication upon them."

Jose's eyes widened while his friend talked. Was he losing his own
senses? Or was it true, as his lamented father had said, that he had
been cast under the spell of the devil's wiles? Had he been
foreordained to destruction by his own heretical thought? For, if what
he heard in Rome was truth, then was he damned, irrevocably!

"Come," said his friend, taking his arm; "let us go to the library and
read the _Credo_ of the Holy Father, Pius the Fourth, wherein is set
forth in detail the doctrinal system of our beloved Church. And let me
urge you, my dear young friend, to accept it, unreservedly, and be at
peace, else will your life be a ceaseless torment."

Oh, that he could have done so! That he could have joined those
thousands of faithful, loyal adherents to Holy Church, who find in its
doctrines naught that stimulates a doubt, nor urges against the divine
institution of its gorgeous, material fabric!

But, vain desire! "I cannot! I cannot!" he wailed in the dark hours of
night upon his bed. "I cannot love a God who has to be prayed to by
Saints and Virgin, and persuaded by them not to damn His own children!
I cannot believe that the Pope, a mere human being, can canonize
Saints and make spiritual beings who grant the prayers of men and
intercede with God for them! Yes, I know there are multitudes of good
people who believe and accept the doctrines of the Church. But, alas!
I am not one of them, nor can be."

For, we repeat, the little Jose was morbidly honest. And this gave
rise to fear, a corroding fear that he might not do right by his
God, his mother, and himself, the three variants in his complex
life-equation. His self-condemnation increased; yet his doubts
kept pace with it. He more than ever distrusted his own powers after
his first four years in the seminary. He more than ever lacked
self-confidence. He was more than ever vacillating, hesitant, and
infirm of purpose. He even at times, when under the pall of
melancholia, wondered if he had really loved his deceased father,
and whether it was real grief which he felt at his parent's demise.
Often, too, when fear and doubt pressed heavily, and his companions
avoided him because of the aura of gloom in which he dwelt, he
wondered if he were becoming insane. He seemed to become obsessed
with the belief that his ability to think was slowly paralyzing. And
with it his will. And yet, proof that this was not the case was
found in his stubborn opposition to trite acquiescence, and in his
infrequent reversals of mood, when he would even feel an intense,
if transient, sense of exaltation in the thought that he was doing
the best that in him lay.

It was during one of these lighter moods, and at the close of a school
year, that a great joy came to him in an event which left a lasting
impress upon his life. Following close upon a hurried visit which his
uncle paid to Rome, the boy was informed that it had been arranged for
him to accompany the Papal Legate on a brief journey through Germany
and England, returning through France, in order that he might gain a
first-hand impression of the magnitude of the work which the Church
was doing in the field, and meet some of her great men. The
broadening, quieting, confidence-inspiring influence of such a journey
would be, in the opinion of Padre Rafael, incalculable. And so, with
eager, bubbling hope, the lad set out.

Whatever it may have been intended that the boy should see on this
ecclesiastical pilgrimage, he returned to Rome at the end of three
months with his quick, impressionable mind stuffed with food for
reflection. Though he had seen the glories of the Church, worshiped in
her matchless temples, and sat at the feet of her great scholars, now
in the quiet of his little room he found himself dwelling upon a
single thought, into which all of his collected impressions were
gathered: "The Church--Catholic and Protestant--is--oh, God, the
Church is--not sick, not dying, but--_dead_! Aye, it has served both
God and Mammon, and paid the awful penalty! And what is left?
_Caesarism_!" The great German and British nations were not Catholic.
But worse, the Protestant people of the German Empire were sadly
indifferent to religion. He had seen, in Berlin, men of family trying
to resell the Bibles which their children had used in preparation for
confirmation. He had found family worship all but extinct. He had
marked the widespread indifference among Protestant parents in regard
to the religious instruction of their young. He had been told there
that parents had but a slight conception of their duty as moral
guides, and that children were growing up with only sensuous pleasures
and material gain as their life-aims. Again and again he was shown
where in whole districts it was utterly impossible to secure young men
for ordination to the Protestant ministry. And he was furnished with
statistics setting forth the ominous fact that within a few years,
were the present decline unchecked, there would be no students in the
Protestant universities of the country.

"Do you not see in this, my son," said the Papal Legate, "the blight
of unbelief? Do you not mark the withering effects of the modern
so-called scientific thought? What think you of a religion wherein the
chief interest centers in trials for heresy; whose ultimate effect
upon human character is a return to the raw, primitive, immature sense
of life that once prevailed among this great people? What think you
now of Luther and his diabolical work?"

The wondering boy hung his head without reply. Would Germany at length
come to the true fold? And was that fold the Holy Catholic Church?

And England--ah! there was the Anglican church, Catholic, but not
Roman, and therefore but a counterfeit of the Lord's true Church.
Would it endure? "No," the Legate had said; "already defection has set
in, and the prodigal's return to the loving parent in Rome is but a
matter of time."

Then came his visit to the great abbey of Westminster, and the
impression which, to his last earthly day, he bore as one of his most
sacred treasures. There in the famous Jerusalem Chamber he had sat,
his eyes suffused with tears and his throat choked with emotion. In
that room the first Lancastrian king long years before had closed his
unhappy life. There the great Westminster Confession had been framed.
There William of Orange had held his weighty discussion of the
Prayer-Book revision, which was hoped to bring Churchmen and
Dissenters again into harmony. And there, greatest of all, had
gathered, day after day, and year after year, the patient, devoted
group of men who gave to the world its Revised Edition of the Holy
Bible, only a few brief years ago. As the rapt Jose closed his eyes
and listened to the whispered conversation of the scholarly men about
him, he seemed to see the consecrated Revisers, seated again at the
long table, deep in the holy search of the Scriptures for the profound
secrets of life which they hold. He saw with what sedulous care they
pursued their sacred work, without trace of prejudice or religious
bias, and with only the selfless purpose always before them to render
to mankind a priceless benefit in a more perfect rendition of the Word
of God. Why could not men come together now in that same generous
spirit of love? But no, Rome would never yield her assumptions. But
when the lad rose and followed his guides from the room, it was with a
new-born conviction, and a revival of his erstwhile firm purpose to
translate for himself, at the earliest opportunity, the Greek
Testament, if, perchance, he might find thereby what his yearning soul
so deeply craved, the truth.

That the boy was possessed of scholarly instincts, there could be no
doubt. His ability had immediately attracted his instructors on
entering the seminary. And, but for his stubborn opposition to
dogmatic acceptance without proofs, he might have taken and maintained
the position of leader in scholarship in the institution. Literature
and the languages, particularly Greek, were his favorite studies, and
in these he excelled. Even as a child, long before the eventful night
when his surreptitious reading of Voltaire precipitated events, he had
determined to master Greek, and some day to translate the New
Testament from the original sources into his beloved Castilian tongue.
Before setting out for Rome he had so applied himself to the worn
little grammar which the proprietor of the bookstall in Seville had
loaned him, that he was able to make translations with comparative
fluency. In the seminary he plunged into it with avidity; and when he
returned from his journey with the Papal Legate he began in earnest
his translation of the Testament. This, like so much of the boy's work
and writing, was done secretly and in spare moments. And his zeal was
such that often in the middle of the night it would compel him to rise
and, after drawing the shades carefully and stopping the crack under
the door with his cassock, light his candle and dig away at his
Testament until dawn.

This study of the New Testament in the Greek resulted in many
translations differing essentially from the accepted version, as could
not but happen when a mind so original as that of the boy Jose was
concentrated upon it. His first stumbling block was met in the prayer
of Jesus in an attempt to render the petition, "Give us this day our
daily bread," into idiomatic modern thought. The word translated
"daily" was not to be found elsewhere in the Greek language.
Evidently the Aramaic word which Jesus employed, and of which this
Greek word was a translation, must have been an unusual one--a coined
expression. And what did it mean? No one knows. Jose found means to
put the question to his tutor. He was told that it doubtless meant
"super-supernal." But what could "super-supernal" convey to the
world's multitude of hungry suppliants for the bread of life! And so
he rendered the phrase "Give us each day a better understanding of
Thee." Again, going carefully through his Testament the boy crossed
out the words translated "God," and in their places substituted
"divine influence." Many of the best known and most frequently
quoted passages suffered similarly radical changes at his hands. For
the translation "truth," the boy often preferred to substitute
"reality"; and such passages as "speaking the truth in love" were
rendered by him, "lovingly speaking of those things which are real."
"Faith" and "belief" were generally changed to "understanding" and
"real knowing," so that the passage, "O ye of little faith,"
became in his translation, "O ye of slight understanding." The word
"miracle" he consistently changed to "sign" throughout. The command to
ask "in the name of Jesus" caused him hours of deep and perplexing
thought, until he hit upon the, to him, happy rendering, "in his
character." Why not? In the character of the Christ mankind might ask
anything and it would be given them. But to acquire that character
men must repent. And the Greek word "metanoia," so generally
rendered "repentance," would therefore have to be translated "radical
and complete change of thought." Again, why not? Was not a complete
change of thought requisite if one were to become like Jesus? Could
mortals think continually of murder, warfare, disaster, failure,
crime, sickness and death, and of the acquisition of material
riches and power, and still hope to acquire the character of the
meek but mighty Nazarene? Decidedly no! And so he went on delving
and plodding, day after day, night after night, substituting and
changing, but always, even if unconsciously, giving to the Scripture
a more metaphysical and spiritual meaning, which displaced in its
translation much of the material and earthy.

Before the end of his seminary training the translation was complete.
What a new light it seemed to throw upon the mission of Jesus! How
fully he realized now that creeds and confessions had never even begun
to sound the profound depths of the Bible! What a changed message it
seemed to carry for mankind! How he longed to show it to his
preceptors and discuss it with them! But his courage failed when he
faced this thought. However, another expedient presented: he would
write a treatise on the New Testament, embodying the salient facts of
his translation, and send it out into the world for publication in the
hope that it might do much good. Again, night after night in holy zeal
he toiled on the work, and when completed, sent it, under his name, to
a prominent literary magazine published in Paris.

Its appearance--for it was accepted eagerly by the editor, who was
bitterly hostile to the Church--caused a stir in ecclesiastical
circles and plunged the unwise lad into a sea of trouble. The essay in
general might have been excusable on its distinct merits and the
really profound scholarship exhibited in its composition. But when the
boy, a candidate for holy orders, and almost on the eve of his
ordination, seized upon the famous statement of Jesus in which he is
reported to have told Peter that he was the rock upon which the Lord's
church should be eternally founded, and showed that Jesus called Peter
a stone, "_petros_," a loose stone, and one of many, whereas he then
said that his church should be founded upon "_petra_," the living,
immovable rock of truth, thus corroborating Saint Augustine, but
confuting other supposedly impregnable authority for the superiority
and infallibility of the Church, it was going a bit too far.

The result was severe penance, coupled with soul-searing reprimand,
and absolute prohibition of further original writing. His translation
of the Testament was confiscated, and he was commanded to destroy
all notes referring to it, and to refrain from making further
translations. His little room was searched, and all references and
papers which might be construed as unevangelical were seized and
burned. He was then transferred to another room for the remainder of
his seminary course, and given a roommate, a cynical, sneering
bully of Irish descent, steeped to the core in churchly doctrine,
who did not fail to embrace every opportunity to make the suffering
penitent realize that he was in disgrace and under surveillance. The
effect was to drive the sensitive boy still further into himself,
and to augment the sullenness of disposition which had earlier
characterized him and separated him from social intercourse with
the world in which he moved apart from his fellow-men.

Thus had Jose been shown very clearly that implicit obedience would at
all times be exacted from him by the Church. He had been shown quite
unmistakably that an inquisitive and determined spirit would not be
tolerated if it led to deductions at variance with accepted tradition.
He might starve mentally, if his prescribed food did not satisfy his
hunger; but he must understand, once for all, that truth had long
since been revealed, and that it was not within his province to
attempt any further additions to the revelation.

Once more, for the sake of his mother, and that he might learn all
that the Church had to teach him, the boy conscientiously tried to
obey. He was reminded again that, though taught to obey, he was being
trained to lead. This in a sense pleased him, as offering surcease
from an erking sense of responsibility. Nevertheless, though he
constantly wavered in decision; though at times the Church won him,
and he yielded temporarily to her abundant charms; the spirit of
protest did wax steadily stronger within him as the years passed. Back
and forth he swung, like a pendulum, now drawn by the power and
influence of the mighty Church; now, as he approached it, repelled by
the things which were revealed as he drew near. In the last two years
of his course his soul-revolt often took the form of open protest to
his preceptors against indulgences and the sacramental graces, against
the arbitrary Index Expurgatorius, and the Church's stubborn
opposition to modern progression. Like Faust, his studies were
convincing him more and more firmly of the emptiness of human
hypotheses and undemonstrable philosophy. The growing conviction that
the Holy Church was more worldly than spiritual filled his shrinking
soul at times with horror. The limiting thought of Rome was often
stifling to him. He had begun to realize that liberty of thought and
conscience were his only as he received it already outlined from the
Church. Even his interpretation of the Bible must come from her. His
very ideas must first receive the ecclesiastical stamp before he might
advance them. His opinions must measure up--or down--to those of his
tutors, ere he might even hold them. In terror he felt that the Church
was absorbing him, heart and mind. His individuality was seeping away.
In time he would become but a link in the great worldly system which
he was being trained to serve.

These convictions did not come to him all at once, nor were they as
yet firmly fixed. They were rather suggestions which became
increasingly insistent as the years went on. He had entered the
seminary at the tender age of twelve, his mind wholly unformed, but
protesting even then. All through his course he had sought what
there was in Christianity upon which he could lay firm hold. In
the Church he had found an ultra-conservative spirit and extreme
reverence for authority. Tito had told him that it was the equivalent
of ancestor-worship. But when he one day told his instructors that he
was not necessarily a disbeliever in the Scriptures because he did
not accept their interpretation of them, he could not but realize
that Tito had come dangerously near the truth. His translation of
the Greek Testament had forced him to the conclusion that much of the
material contained in the Gospels was not Jesus' own words, but the
commentaries of his reporters; not the Master's diction, but
theological lecturing by the writers of the Gospels. Moreover, in
the matter of prayer, especially, he was all at sea. As a child he had
spent hours formulating humble, fervent petitions, which did not seem
to draw replies. And so there began to form within his mind a
concept, faint and ill-defined, of a God very different from that
canonically accepted. He tried to believe that there was a Creator
back of all things, but that He was inexorable Law. And the lad
was convinced that, somehow, he had failed to get into harmony with
that infinite Law. But, in that case, why pray to Law? And, most
foolish of all, why seek to influence it, whether through Virgin or
Saint? And, if God is a good Father, why ask Him to _be_ good? Then,
to his insistent question, "_Unde Deus_?" he tried to formulate
the answer that God is Spirit, and omnipresent. But, alas! that
made the good God include evil. No, there was a terrible human
misunderstanding of the divine nature, a woeful misinterpretation.
He must try to ask for light in the character of the Christ. But
then, how to assume that character? Like a garment? Impossible! "Oh,
God above," he wailed aloud again and again, "I don't know what to
believe! I don't know what to think!" Foolish lad! Why did he think
at all, when there were those at hand to relieve him of that
onerous task?

And so, at last, Jose sought to resign himself to his fate, and,
thrusting aside these mocking questions, accept the opportunities for
service which his tutors so wisely emphasized as the Church's special
offering to him. He yielded to their encouragement to plunge heartily
into his studies, for in such absorption lay diversion from dangerous
channels of thought. Slowly, too, he yielded to their careful
insistence that he must suffer many things to be so for the nonce,
even as Jesus did, lest a too radical resistance now should delay the
final glorious consummation.

Was the boy actuated too strongly by the determination that his
widowed mother's hopes should never be blasted by any assertion of
his own will? Was he passively permitting himself to be warped and
twisted into a minion of an institution alien to his soul in bigoted
adherence to his morbid sense of integrity? Was he for the present
countenancing a lie, rather than permit the bursting of a bomb
which would rend the family and bring his beloved mother in sorrow to
the grave? Or was he biding his time, an undeveloped David, who
would some day sally forth like the lion of the tribe of Juda, to
match his moral courage against the blustering son of Anak? Time
only would tell. The formative period of his character was not yet
ended, and the data for prognostication were too complex and
conflicting. We can only be sure that his consuming desire to know
had been carefully fostered in the seminary, but in such a manner as
unwittingly to add to his confusion of thought and to increase his
fear of throwing himself unreservedly upon his own convictions. That
he grew to perceive the childishness of churchly dogma, we know.
That he appreciated the Church's insane license of affirmation, its
impudent affirmations of God's thoughts and desires, its coarse
assumptions of knowledge of the inner workings of the mind of
Omnipotence, we likewise know. But, on the other hand, we know
that he feared to break with the accepted faith. The claims of
Protestantism, though lacking the pomp and pageantry of Catholicism
to give them attractiveness, offered him an interpretation of Christ's
mission that was little better than the teachings he was receiving.
And so his hesitant and vacillating nature, which hurled him into the
lists to-day as the resolute foe of dogma and superstition, and
to-morrow would leave him weak and doubting at the feet of the
enemy, kept him wavering, silent and unhappy, on the thin edge of
resolution throughout the greater part of his course. His lack of
force, or the holding of his force in check by his filial honesty and
his uncertainty of conviction, kept him in the seminary for eight
years, during which his being was slowly, imperceptibly descending
into him. At the age of twenty he was still unsettled, but further
than even he himself realized from Rome. Who shall say that he was
not at the same time nearer to God?

On the day that he was twenty, three things of the gravest import
happened to the young Jose. His warm friend, Bernardo, died suddenly,
almost in his arms; his uncle, Rafael de Rincon, paid an unexpected
visit to the Vatican; and the lad received the startling announcement
that he would be ordained to the priesthood on the following day.

The sudden demise of the young Bernardo plunged Jose into an excess of
grief and again encompassed him with the fear and horror of death. He
shut himself up in his room, and toward the close of the day took his
writing materials and penned a passionate appeal to his mother,
begging her to absolve him from his promises, and let him go out into
the world, a free man in search of truth. But scarcely had he finished
his letter when he was summoned into the Rector's office. There it was
explained to him that, in recognition of his high scholarship, of his
penitence and loyal obedience since the Testament episode, and of the
advanced work which he was now doing in the seminary and the splendid
promise he was giving, the Holy Father had been asked to grant a
special indult, waiving the usual age requirement and permitting the
boy to be ordained with the class which was to receive the holy order
of the priesthood the following day. It was further announced that
after ordination he should spend a year in travel with the Papal
Legate, and on his return might enter the office of the Papal
Secretary of State, as an under-secretary, or office assistant. While
there, he would be called upon to teach in the seminary, and later
might be sent to the University to pursue higher studies leading to
the degree of Doctor.

Before the boy had awakened to his situation, the day of his
ordination arrived. The proud mother, learning from the secretary of
the precipitation of events, and doting on the boy whom she had never
understood; in total ignorance of the complex elements of his soul,
and little realizing that between her and her beloved son there was
now a gulf fixed which would never be bridged, saw only the happy
fruition of a life ambition. Fortunately she had been kept in
ignorance of the dubious incident of the Testament translation and its
results upon the boy; and when the long anticipated day dawned her
eyes swam in tears of hallowed joy. The Archbishop and his grim
secretary each congratulated the other heartily, and the latter,
breaking into one of his rare smiles, murmured gratefully, "At last!
And our enemies have lost a champion!"

The night before the ordination Jose had begged to occupy a room
alone. The appeal which emanated from his sad face, his thin and
stooping body, his whole drawn and tortured being, would have melted
flint. His request was granted. Throughout the night the boy, on his
knees beside the little bed, wrestled with the emotions which were
tearing his soul. Despondency lay over him like a pall. A vague
presentiment of impending disaster pressed upon him like a millstone.
Ceaselessly he weighed and reviewed the forces which had combined to
drive him into the inconsistent position which he now occupied.
Inconsistent, for his highest ideal had been truth. He was by nature
consecrated to it. He had sought it diligently in the Church, and now
that he was about to become her priest he could not make himself
believe that he had found it. Now, when bound to her altars, he faced
a life of deception, of falsehood, as the champion of a faith which he
could not unreservedly embrace.

But he had accepted his education from the Church; and would he shrink
from making payment therefor? Yet, on the other hand, must he
sacrifice honor--yea, his whole future--to the payment of a debt
forced upon him before he had reached the age of reason? The oath of
ordination, the priest's oath, echoed in his throbbing ears like a
soul-sentence to eternal doom; while spectral shades of moving priests
and bishops, laying cold and unfeeling hands upon him, sealing him to
endless servitude to superstition and deception, glided to and fro
through the darkness before his straining eyes. Could he receive the
ordination to-morrow? He had promised--but the assumption of its
obligations would brand his shrinking soul with torturing falsehood!
If he sank under doubt and fear, could he still retract? What then of
his mother and his promise to her? What of the Rincon honor and pride?
Living disgrace, or a living lie--which? Sacrifice of self--or mother?
God knew, he had never deliberately countenanced a falsehood--yet,
through circumstances which he did not have the will to control, he
was a living one!

Fair visions of a life untrammeled by creed or religious convention
hovered at times that night before his mental gaze. He saw a cottage,
rose-bowered, glowing in the haze of the summer sun. He saw before its
door a woman, fresh and fair--his wife--and children--his--shouting
their joyous greetings as they trooped out to welcome him returning
from his day's labors. How he clung to this picture when it faded and
left him, an oath-bound celibate, facing his lonely and cheerless
destiny! God! what has the Church to offer for such sacrifice as this!
An education? Yea, an induction into relative truths and mortal
opinions, and the sad record of the devious wanderings of the human
mind! An opportunity for service? God knows, the free, unhampered
mind, open to truth and progress, loosed from mediaeval dogma and
ignorant convention, seeing its brothers' needs and meeting in them
its own, has opportunities for rich service to-day outside the Church
the like of which have never before been offered!

To and fro his heaving thought ebbed and flowed. Back and forth the
arguments, pro and con, surged through the still hours of the
night. After all, had he definite proof that the tenets of Holy
Church were false? No, he could not honestly say that he had. The
question still stood in abeyance. Even his conviction of their
falsity at times had sorely wavered. And if his heart cried out
against their acceptance, it nevertheless had nothing tangibly
definite to offer in substitution. But--the end had come so
suddenly! With his life free and untrammeled he might yet find the
truth. Oath-bound and limited to the strictures of the Church, what
hope was there but the acceptance of prescribed canons of human
belief? Still, the falsities which he believed he had found within the
Church were not greater than those against which she herself fought in
the world. And if she accepted him, did it not indicate on her part
a tacit recognition of the need of just what he had to offer, a
searching spirit of inquiry and consecration to the unfoldment of
truth? Alas! the incident of the Greek translation threw its
shadow of doubt upon that hope.

But if the Church accepted him, she _must_ accept his stand! He
_would_ raise his voice in protest, and would continually point to the
truth as he discerned it! If he received the order of priesthood from
her it was with the understanding that his acceptance of her tenets
was tentative! But--forlorn expedient! He knew something of
ecclesiastical history. He thought he knew--young as he was--that the
Church stood not for progress, not for conformity to changing ideals,
not for alignment with the world's great reforms, but for _herself_,
first, midst, and last!

Thus the conflict raged, while thoughts, momentous for even a mature
thinker, tore through the mind of this lad of twenty. Prayers for
light--prayers which would have rent the heart of an Ivan--burst at
times from the feverish lips of this child of circumstance. Infinite
Father--Divine Influence--Spirit of Love--whatever Thou art--wilt Thou
not illumine the thought-processes of this distracted youth and thus
provide the way of escape from impending destruction? Can it be Thy
will that this fair mind shall be utterly crushed? Do the agonized
words of appeal which rise to Thee from his riven soul fall broken
against ears of stone?

"Occupy till I come!" Yea, beloved Master, he hears thy voice and
strives to obey--but the night is filled with terror--the clouds of
error lower about him--the storm bursts--and thou art not there!

Day dawned. A classmate, sent to summon the lad, roused him from the
fitful sleep into which he had sunk on the cold floor. His mind was no
longer active. Dumbly following his preceptors at the appointed hour,
he proceeded with the class to the chapel. Dimly conscious of his
surroundings, his thought befogged as if in a dream, his eyes
half-blinded by the gray haze which seemed to hang before them, he
celebrated the Mass, like one under hypnosis, received the holy
orders, and assumed the obligations which constituted him a priest of
Holy Church.




CHAPTER 8


On a sweltering midsummer afternoon, a year after the events just
related, Rome lay panting for breath and counting the interminable
hours which must elapse before the unpitying sun would grant her a
short night's respite from her discomfort. Her streets were deserted
by all except those whose affairs necessitated their presence in
them. Her palaces and villas had been abandoned for weeks by their
fortunate owners, who had betaken themselves to the seashore or to the
more distance resorts of the North. The few inexperienced tourists
whose lack of practical knowledge in the matter of globe-trotting had
brought them into the city so unseasonably were hastily and
indignantly assembling their luggage and completing arrangements to
flee from their over-warm reception.

In a richly appointed suite of the city's most modern and
ultra-fashionable hotel two maids, a butler, and the head porter were
packing and removing a formidable array of trunks and suit cases,
while a woman of considerably less than middle age, comely in person
and tastefully attired in a loose dressing gown of flowered silk,
alternated between giving sharp directions to the perspiring workers
and venting her abundant wrath and disappointment upon the chief
clerk, as with evident reluctance she filled one of a number of signed
checks to cover the hotel expenses of herself and servants for a
period of three weeks, although they had arrived only the day before
and, on account of the stifling heat, were leaving on the night
express for Lucerne. The clerk regretted exceedingly, but on Madam
Ames' order the suite had been held vacant for that length of time,
during which the management had daily looked for her arrival, and had
received no word of her delay. Had Madam herself not just admitted
that she had altered her plans en route, without notifying the hotel,
and had gone first to the Italian lakes, without cancelling her order
for the suite? And so her sense of justice must convince her that the
management was acting wholly within its rights in making this demand.

While the preparations for departure were in progress the woman's
two children played about the trunks and raced through the rooms
and adjoining corridor with a child's indifference to climatal
conditions.

"Let's ring for the elevator and then hide, Sidney!" suggested the
girl, as she panted after her brother, who had run to the far end of
the long hall.

"No, Kathleen, it wouldn't be right," objected the boy.

"Right! Ho! ho! What's the harm, goody-goody? Go tell mother, if you
want to!" she called after him, as he started back to their rooms.
Refusing to accompany him, the girl leaned against the balustrade of a
stairway which led to the floor below and watched her brother until he
disappeared around a turn of the corridor.

"Baby!" burst from her pouting lips. "'Fraid of everything! It's no
fun playing with him!" Then, casting a glance of inquiry about her,
"I'd just like to hide down these stairs. Mother and nurse never let
me go where I want to."

Obeying the impulse stimulated by her freedom for the moment, the
child suddenly turned and darted down the stairway. On the floor
beneath she found herself at the head of a similar stairway, down
which she likewise hurried, with no other thought than to annoy her
brother, who was sure to be sent in search of her when her mother
discovered her absence. Opening the door below, the child unexpectedly
found herself in an alley back of the hotel.

Her sense of freedom was exhilarating. The sunlit alley beckoned to a
delightful journey of discovery. With a happy laugh and a toss of her
yellow curls she hurried along the narrow way and into the street
which crossed it a short distance beyond. Here she paused and looked
in each direction, uncertain which way to continue. In one direction,
far in the distance, she saw trees. They looked promising; she would
go that way. And trotting along the blazing, deserted street, she at
length reached the grateful shade and threw herself on the soft grass
beneath, tired and panting, but happy in the excitement of her little
adventure.

Recovering quickly, the child rose to explore her environment. She was
in one of those numerous public parks lining the Tiber and forming the
city's playground for her less fortunate wards. Here and there were
scattered a few people, mostly men, who had braved the heat of the
streets in the hope of obtaining a breath of cool air near the water.
At the river's edge a group of ragged urchins were romping noisily;
and on a bench near them a young priest sat, writing in a notebook. As
she walked toward them a beggar roused himself from the grass and
looked covetously through his evil eyes at the child's rich clothes.

The gamins stopped their play as the girl approached, and stared at
her in expectant curiosity. One of them, a girl of apparently her own
age, spoke to her, but in a language which she did not understand.
Receiving no reply, the urchins suddenly closed together, and holding
hands, began to circle around her, shouting like little Indians.

The child stood for a moment perplexed. Then terror seized her.
Hurling herself through the circle, she fled blindly, with the gamins
in pursuit. With no sense of direction, her only thought to escape
from the dirty band at her heels, she rushed straight to the river and
over the low bank into the sluggish, yellow water. A moment later the
priest who had been sitting on the bench near the river, startled by
the frenzied cries of the now frightened children, rushed into the
shallow water and brought the girl in safety to the bank.

Speaking to her in her own language, the priest sought to soothe the
child and learn her identity as he carried her to the edge of the park
and out into the street. But his efforts were unavailing. She could
only sob hysterically and call piteously for her mother. A civil guard
appeared at the street corner, and the priest summoned him. But
scarcely had he reported the details of the accident when, suddenly
uttering a cry, the priest thrust the girl into the arms of the
astonished officer and fled back to the bench where he had been
sitting. Another cry escaped him when he reached it. Throwing himself
upon the grass, he searched beneath the bench and explored the ground
about it. Then, his face blanched with fear, he rose and traversed the
entire park, questioning every occupant. The gamins who had caused the
accident had fled. The beggar, too, had disappeared. The park was all
but deserted. Returning again to the bench, the priest sank upon it
and buried his head in his hands, groaning aloud. A few minutes later
he abruptly rose and, glancing furtively around as if he feared to be
seen, hastened out to the street. Then, darting into a narrow
crossroad, he disappeared in the direction of the Vatican.

At midnight, Padre Jose de Rincon was still pacing the floor of his
room, frantic with apprehension. At the same hour, the small girl who
had so unwittingly plunged him into the gravest danger was safely
asleep in her mother's arms on the night express, which shrieked and
thundered on its way to Lucerne.




CHAPTER 9


Always as a child Jose had been the tortured victim of a vague,
unformed apprehension of impending disaster, a presentiment that some
day a great evil would befall him. The danger before which he now grew
white with fear seemed to realize that fatidic thought, and hang
suspended above him on a filament more tenuous than the hair which
held aloft the fabled sword of Damocles. That filament was the slender
chance that the notebook with which he was occupied when the terrified
child precipitated herself into the river, and which he had hastily
dropped on seeing her plight and rushing to the rescue, had been
picked up by those who would consider its value _nil_ as an instrument
of either good or evil. Before the accident occurred he had been
absorbed in his writing and was unaware of other occupants of the park
than himself and the children, whose boisterous romping in such close
proximity had scarce interrupted his occupation. Then their frightened
cries roused him to an absorbing sense of the girl's danger. Nor did
he think again of the notebook until he was relating the details of
the accident to the guard at the edge of the park, when, like a blow
from above, the thought of it struck him.

Trembling with dread anticipation, he had hurried back to the bench,
only to find his fears realized. The book had disappeared! His
frenzied search yielded no hint of its probable mode of removal.
Overcome by a sickening sense of misfortune, he had sunk upon the
bench in despair. But fear again roused him and drove him, slinking
like a hunted beast, from the park--fear that the possessor of the
book, appreciating its contents, but with no thought of returning it,
might be hovering near, with the view of seeing what manner of priest
it could be who would thus carelessly leave such writings as these in
the public parks and within the very shadow of St. Peter's.

But to escape immediate identification as their author did not remove
his danger. Their character was such that, should they fall into
certain hands, his identity must surely be established. Even though
his name did not appear, they abounded in references which could
hardly fail to point to him. But, far worse, they cited names of
personages high in political and ecclesiastical circles in references
which, should they become public, must inevitably set in motion forces
whose far-reaching and disastrous effects he dared not even imagine.

For the notebook contained the soul-history of the man. It was
the _journal intime_ which he had begun as a youth, and continued
and amplified through succeeding years. It was the repository of
his inmost thoughts, the receptacle of his secret convictions.
It held, crystallized in writing, his earliest protests against
the circumstances which were molding his life. It voiced the
subsequent agonized outpourings of his soul when the holy order of
priesthood was conferred upon him. It recorded his views of life,
of religion, of the cosmos. It held in burning words his thoughts
anent the Holy Catholic faith--his sense of its virtues, its
weaknesses, its assumptions, its fallacies. It set forth his
confession of helplessness before circumstances too strong for
his feeble will, and it cited therewith, as partial justification
for his conduct, his tender love for his mother and his firm
intention of keeping forever inviolable his promises to her. It
voiced his passionate prayers for light, and his dim hopes for
the future, while portraying the wreck of a life whose elements
had been too complex for him to sift and classify and combine in
their normal proportions.

A year had passed since the unhappy lad had opened his mouth to
receive the iron bit which Destiny had pressed so mercilessly against
it. During that time the Church had conscientiously carried out
her program as announced to him just prior to his ordination.
Associated with the Papal Legate, he had traveled extensively through
Europe, his impressionable mind avidly absorbing the customs,
languages, and thought-processes of many lands. At Lourdes he had
stood in deep meditation before the miraculous shrine, surrounded
with its piles of discarded canes and crutches, and wondered what
could be the principle, human or divine, that had effected such
cures. In Naples he had witnessed the miraculous liquefaction of
the blood of St. Januarius. He had seen the priests pass through the
great assemblage with the little vial in which the red clot slowly
dissolved into liquid before their credulous eyes; and he had turned
away that they might not mark his flush of shame. In the Cathedral at
Cologne he had gazed long at the supposed skulls of the three Magi who
had worshipped at the rude cradle of the Christ. Set in brilliant
jewels, in a resplendent gilded shrine, these whitened relics,
which Bishop Reinald is believed to have discovered in the twelfth
century, seemed to mock him in the very boldness of the pious fraud
which they externalized. Was the mystery of the Christ involved in
such deceit as this? And perpetrated by his Church? In unhappy Ireland
he had been forced to the conviction that misdirected religious zeal
must some day urge the sturdy Protesters of the North into armed
conflict with their Catholic brothers of the South in another of
those deplorable religious--nay, rather, _theological_--conflicts
which have stained the earth with human blood in the name of the
Prince of Peace. It was all incomprehensible to him, incongruous,
and damnably wicked. Why could not they come together to submit their
creeds, their religious beliefs and tenets, to the test of practical
demonstration, and then discard those which world-history has long
since shown inimical to progress and happiness? Paul urged this very
thing when he wrote, "_Prove_ all things; hold fast to that which is
good." But, alas! the human doctrine of infallibility now stood
squarely in the way.

From his travels with the Legate, Jose returned to Rome, burning with
the holy desire to lend his influence to the institution of those
reforms within the Church of which now he so clearly saw the need.
Savonarola had burned with this same selfless desire to reform the
Church from within. And his life became the forfeit. But the present
age was perforce more tolerant; and was likewise wanting in those
peculiar political conditions which had combined with the religious
issue to send the great reformer to a martyr's death.

As Jose entered Rome he found the city in a state of turmoil. The
occasion was the march of the Catholic gymnastic associations from
the church where they had heard the Mass to St. Peter's, where they
were to be received by the Holy Father. Cries of "Long live
free-thinking!" were issuing from the rabble which followed hooting in
the wake of the procession. To these were retorted, "Viva il Papa Re!"
Jose had been caught in the _melee_, and, but for the interference of
the civil authorities, might have suffered bodily injury. With his
corporeal bruises he now bore away another ineffaceable mental
impression. Were the Italian patriots justified in their hostility
toward the Vatican? Had United Italy come into existence with the
support of the Papacy, or in despite of it? Would the Church forever
set herself against freedom of thought? Always seek to imprison the
human mind? Was her unreasonably stubborn attitude directly
accountable for the presence of atheism in the place, of all places,
where her own influence ought to be most potent, the city of St.
Peter?

For reasons which he could only surmise--perhaps because of his high
scholarship--perhaps because of his remarkable memory, which
constituted him a living encyclopedia in respect of all that entered
it--Jose was now installed in the office of the Papal Secretary of
State as an office assistant. He had received the appointment with
indifference, for he was wholly devoid of ecclesiastical ambition. And
yet it was with a sense of relief that he now felt assured of a career
in the service of the Administrative Congregation of the Church, and
for all time removed from the likelihood of being relegated to the
performance of merely priestly functions. He therefore prepared to
bide his time, and patiently to await opportunities to lend his
willing support to the uplift of the Church and his fellow-men.

The limitations with which he had always been hedged about had not
permitted the lad to know much, if anything, of the multitude of books
on religious and philosophical subjects annually published throughout
the world; and his oath of obedience would have prevented him from
reading them if he had. But he saw no reason why, as part preparation
for his work of moral uplift, he should not continue to seek, at first
hand, the answer to the world-stirring query, What does the Bible
mean? If God gave it, if the theory of verbal inspiration is correct,
and if it is infallible, why then was it necessary to revise it, as
had been done in the wonderful Jerusalem Chamber which he had once
visited? Were those of his associates justified who had scoffed at
that work, and, with a sneer on their lips, voiced the caustic query,
"Fools! Why don't they let the Bible alone?" If the world is to be
instructed out of the old sensual theology, does the Bible contain the
truth with which to replace it? For to tear down an ideal without
substituting for it a better one is nothing short of criminal. And so
Jose plunged deeply into the study of Scriptural sources.

He had thought the rich treasures of the Vatican library unrestrictedly
open to him, and he therefore brought his fine Latin and Greek
scholarship to bear on its oldest uncial manuscripts. He began the study
of Hebrew, that he might later read the Talmud and the ancient Jewish
rabbinical lore. He pursued unflaggingly his studies of the English,
French, and German languages, that he might search for the truth
crystallized in those tongues. As his work progressed, the flush of
health came to his cheeks. His eyes reflected the consuming fire which
glowed in his eager soul. As he labored, he wrote; and his discoveries
and meditations all found lodgment in his sole confidant, his journal.

If the Church knew what Christianity was, then Jose was forced to
admit that he did not. He, weak, frail, fallible, _remit sins_?
Preposterous! What was the true remission of sins but their utter
destruction? He change the wafer and wine into the flesh and blood
of Jesus? Nay, he was no spiritual thaumaturgus! He could not do even
the least of the works of the Master, despite his priestly character!
Yet, it was not he, but the Christ, operating through him as a
channel, who performed the work. Then why did not the Christ
through him heal the sick and raise the dead? "Nay," he deplored,
as he bent over his task, "the Church may teach that the bones, the
teeth, the hair, and other human relics of canonized Saints can heal
the sick--but even the Cardinals and the Holy Father when they fall
ill demand the services, not of these, but of earthly physicians.
They seek not the Christ-healing then; nor can they by their boasted
powers heal themselves."

Israel's theme was: Righteousness is salvation. But Jose knew not how
to define righteousness. Surely it did not mean adherence to human
creeds! It was vastly more than observance of forms! "God is a
spirit," he read; "and they that worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth." Then, voicing his own comments, "Why, then, this
crass materializing of worship? Are images of Saviour, Virgin, and
Saint necessary to excite the people to devotion? Nay, would not the
healing of the sick, the restoration of sight to the blind, and the
performance of the works of the Master by us priests do more than
wooden or marble images to lead men to worship? Proof! proof! proof!
'Show us your works, and we will show you our faith,' cry the people.
'Then will we no longer sacrifice our independence of thought to the
merciless tyranny of human tradition.'" And he knew that this related
to Catholic and Protestant, Jew and Mohammedan alike.

One day a Cardinal, passing through the library, saw the diligent
student at work, and paused to inquire into his labors. "And what do
you seek, my son?" was the kindly query of the aged churchman.

"Scriptural justification for the fundamental tenets of our faith,"
Jose replied quickly, carried away by his soul's animation.

"And you find it, without doubt?"

"Nay, Father, except through what is, to me, unwarranted license and
assumption."

The Cardinal silently continued his way. But permission to translate
further from the Vatican manuscripts was that day withdrawn from
Jose.

Again the youth lapsed into his former habit of moody revery. Shackled
and restless, driven anew into himself, he increasingly poured his
turbulent thought into his journal, not for other and profane eyes to
read--hardly, either, for his own reference--but simply because he
_must_ have some outlet for the expression of his heaving mind. He
turned to it, as he had in other crises in his life, when his pent
soul cried out for some form of relief. He began to revise the record
of the impressions received on his travels with the Papal Legate. He
recorded conversations and impressions of scenes and people which his
abnormally developed reticence would not permit him to discuss
verbally with his associates. He embodied his protests against the
restrictions of ecclesiastical authority. And he noted, too, many a
protest against the political, rather than religious, character of
much of the business transacted in the office to which he was
attached. In the discharge of his ordinary duties he necessarily
became acquainted with much of the inner administrative polity of the
Vatican, and thus at times he learned of policies which stirred his
alien soul to revolt. In his inferior position he could not hope to
raise his voice in protest against these measures which excited his
indignation; but in the loneliness of his room, or on his frequent
long walks after office hours, he was wont to brood over them until
his mind became surcharged and found relief only in emptying itself
into this journal. And often on summer days, when the intense heat
rendered his little room in the dormitory uninhabitable, he would take
his books and papers to some one of the smaller parks lining the
Tiber, and there would lose himself in study and meditation and the
recording of the ceaseless voicing of his lonely soul.

On this particular afternoon, however, his mind had been occupied with
matters of more than ordinary import. It happened that a Bishop from
the United States had arrived in Rome the preceding day to pay his
decennial visit to the Vatican and report on the spiritual condition
of his diocese. While awaiting the return of the Papal Secretary, he
had engaged in earnest conversation with a Cardinal-Bishop of the
Administrative Congregation, in a small room adjoining the one where
Jose was occupied with his clerical duties. The talk had been
animated, and the heavy tapestry at the door had not prevented much of
it from reaching the ears of the young priest and becoming fixed in
his retentive memory.

"While I feel most keenly the persecution to which the Church must
submit in the United States," the Bishop had said, "nevertheless
Your Eminence will admit that there is some ground for complaint in
the conduct of certain of her clergy. It is for the purpose of
removing such vantage ground from our critics that I again urge an
investigation of American priests, with the view of improving their
moral status."

"You say, 'persecution to which the Church _must_ submit.' Is that
quite true?" returned the Cardinal-Bishop. "That is, in the face of
your own gratifying reports? News from the American field is not only
encouraging, but highly stimulating. The statistics which are just at
hand from Monsignor, our Delegate in Washington, reveal the truly
astonishing growth of our beloved cause for the restoration of all
things in Christ. Has not God shown even in our beloved America that
our way of worshiping Him is the way He approves?"

"But, Your Eminence, the constant defections! It was only last week
that a priest and his entire congregation went over to the Episcopal
faith. And--"

"What of that? 'It must needs be that offenses come.' Where one drops
out, ten take his place."

"True, while we recruit our depleted ranks from the Old World. But,
with restricted immigration--"

"Which is not restricted, as yet," replied the Cardinal-Bishop with a
sapient smile. "Nor is there any restriction upon the inspiration,
political as well as spiritual, which the American Government draws
from Rome--an inspiration much more potent, I think, than our
Protestant brethren would care to admit."

"Is that inspiration such, think you, as to draw the American
Government more and more into the hands of the Church?"

"Its effect in the past unquestionably has been such," said the
Cardinal-Bishop meditatively.

"And shall our dreams of an age be fulfilled--that the Holy Father
will throw off the shackles which now hold him a prisoner within the
Vatican, and that he will then personally direct the carrying out of
those policies of world expansion which shall gather all mankind into
the fold of Holy Church?"

"There is a lessening doubt of it," was the tentative reply.

"And--" the Bishop hesitated. "And--shall we say that those
all-embracing policies ultimately will be directed by the Holy Father
from Washington itself?"

A long pause ensued, during which Jose was all ears.

"Why not?" finally returned the Cardinal-Bishop slowly. "Why not, if
it should better suit our purposes? It may become advisable to remove
the Holy See from Rome."

"But--impossible!"

"Not at all--quite possible, though I will not say probable. But let
us see, can we not say that the time has arrived when no President of
the United States can be elected without the Catholic vote? Having our
vote, we have his pledges to support our policies. These statistics
before us show that already seventy-five per cent of all Government
employes in Washington are of our faith. We control Federal, State,
County and City offices without number. I think--I think the time is
not distant when we shall be able to set up a candidate of our faith
for the Presidency, if we care to. And," he mused, "we shall elect
him. But, all in good time, all in good time."

"And is that," the Bishop interrogated eagerly, "what the Holy Father
is now contemplating?"

"I cannot say that it is," answered the noncommittal Cardinal-Bishop.
"But the Holy Father loves America. He rejoices in your report of
progress in your diocese. The successes attained by Catholic
candidates in the recent elections are most gratifying to him. This
not only testifies to the progress of Catholicism in America, but is
tangible proof of the growth of tolerance and liberal-mindedness in
that great nation. The fact that the Catholic Mass is now being said
in the American army affords further proof."

"Yes," meditated the Bishop. "Our candidates who receive election are
quite generally loyal to the Church."

"And should constitute a most potent factor in the holy work of making
America dominantly Catholic," added the older man.

"True, Your Eminence. And yet, this great desideratum can never come
about until the youth are brought into the true fold. And that means,
as you well know, the abolishing of the public school system."

"What think you of that?" asked the Cardinal-Bishop off-handedly.

The Bishop waxed suddenly animated. A subject had been broached which
lay close to his heart. "The public schools constitute a godless sink
of pollution!" he replied heatedly. "They are nurseries of vice! They
are part of an immoral and vicious system of education which is
undermining the religion of American children! I have always contended
that we, the Holy Catholic Church, _must_ control education! I hold
that education outside of the Church is heresy of the most damnable
kind! We have heretofore weakly protested against this pernicious
system, but without success, excepting"--and here he smiled
cynically--"that we have very generally succeeded in forcing the
discontinuance of Bible reading in the public schools. And in certain
towns where our parochial schools do not instruct beyond the eighth
grade, it looks as if we might force the introduction of a form of the
Catholic Mass to be read each morning in the High School."

"Excellent!" exclaimed the Cardinal-Bishop. "Your voice thrills me
like a trumpet call."

"I would it were such," cried the Bishop excitedly, "summoning the
faithful to strike a blow which shall be felt! What right have the
United States, or any nation, to educate the young? None whatever!
Education belongs to the Church! Our rights in this respect have been
usurped! But they shall be restored--if need be, at the point of
the--"

"You positively make my old heart leap to the fray," interrupted the
smiling, white-haired churchman. "But I feel assured that we shall
accomplish just that without violence or bloodshed, my son. You echo
my sentiments exactly on the pregnant question. And yet, by getting
Catholics employed in the public schools as teachers, and by electing
our candidates to public offices, we quietly accomplish our ends, do
we not?"

"But when will the Holy Father recognize the time as propitious for a
more decisive step in that respect?"

"Why, my son, I think you fail to see that we keep continually
stepping. We are growing by leaps and bounds in America. At the close
of the War of Independence the United States numbered some forty-five
thousand adherents to the Catholic faith. Now the number has increased
to twelve or fifteen millions. Of these, some four millions are
voters. A goodly number, is it not?"

"Then," cried the Bishop, "let the Holy Father boldly make the demand
that the States appropriate money for the support of our parochial
schools!"

Jose's ears throbbed. Before his ordination he had heard the Liturgy
for the conversion of America recited in the chapel of the seminary.
And as often he had sought to picture the condition of the New World
under the religio-political influence which has for centuries
dominated the Old. But he had always dismissed the idea of such
domination as wholly improbable, if not quite impossible in America.
Yet, since coming into the Papal Secretary's office, his views were
slowly undergoing revision. The Church was concentrating on America.
Of that there could be no doubt. Indeed, he had come to believe its
success as a future world-power to be a function of the stand which it
could secure and maintain in the United States. Now, as he strained
his ears, he could hear the aged Cardinal-Bishop's low, tense words--

"There can be no real separation of Church and State. The Church is
_not_ inferior to the civil power, nor is it in any way dependent
upon it. And the Church can never be excluded from educating and
training the young, from molding society, from making laws, and
governing, temporally and spiritually. From this attitude we shall
_never_ depart! Ours is the only true religion. England and Germany
have been spiritually dead. But, praise to the blessed Virgin who
has heard our prayers and made intercession for us, England, after
long centuries of struggle with man-made sects and indefinite dogma,
its spiritually-starving people fast drifting into atheism and
infidelity because of nothing to hold to, has awakened, and in these
first hours of her resurrection is fast returning to the Holy
Church of Rome. America, in these latter days, is rousing from the
blight of Puritanism, Protestantism, and their inevitable result,
free-thinking and anarchy, and is becoming the brightest jewel in
the Papal crown."

The Bishop smiled dubiously. "And yet, Your Eminence," he replied, "we
are heralded from one end of the land to the other as a menace to
Republican institutions."

"Ah, true. And you must agree that Romanism is a distinct menace to
the insane license of speech and press. It is a decided menace to the
insanity of Protestantism. But," he added archly, while his eyes
twinkled, "I have no doubt that when Catholic education has advanced a
little further many of your American preachers, editors, and
Chautauqua demagogues will find themselves behind the bars of
madhouses. Fortunately, that editor of the prominent American magazine
of which you were speaking switched from his heretic Episcopal faith
in time to avoid this unpleasant consequence."

The Bishop reflected for a moment. Then, deliberately, as if
meditating the great import of his words, "Your Eminence, in view of
our strength, and our impregnable position as God's chosen, cannot the
Holy Father insist that the United States mails be barred against the
infamous publications that so basely vilify our Church?"

"And thereby precipitate a revolution?" It was the firm voice of the
Papal Secretary himself, who at that moment entered the room.

"But, Monsignor," said the Bishop, as he rose and saluted the
newcomer, "how much longer must we submit to the gross injustice and
indignities practiced upon us by non-believers?"

"As long as the infallible Holy Father directs," replied that eminent
personage. "Obey him, as you would God himself," the Secretary
continued. "And teach your flock to do likewise. The ballot will do
for us in America what armed resistance never could. Listen, friend,
my finger is on the religious pulse of the world. Nowhere does this
pulse beat as strongly as in that part which we call the United
States. For years I have been watching the various contending forces
in that country, diligently and earnestly studying the elements acting
and reacting upon our Church there. I have come to the conclusion that
the success of Holy Church throughout the world depends upon its
advance in the United States during the next few years. I have become
an American enthusiast! The glorious work of making America Catholic
is so fraught with consequences of vastest import that my blood surges
with the enthusiasm of an old Crusader! But there is much still to be
done. America is a field white for the harvest, almost unobstructed."

"Then," queried the Bishop, "you do not reckon Protestantism an
obstruction?"

"Protestantism!" the Secretary rejoined with a cynical laugh. "No, I
reckon it as nothing. Protestantism in America is decadent. It has
split, divided, and disintegrated, until it is scarcely recognizable.
Its adherents are falling away in great numbers. Its weak tenets and
senile faith hold but comparatively few and lukewarm supporters. It
has degenerated into a sort of social organization, with musicals,
pink teas, and church suppers as attractions. No, America is _bound_
to be classed as a Catholic nation--and I expect to live to see it
thus. Our material and spiritual progress in the United States is
amazing, showing how nobly American Catholics have responded to the
Holy Father's appeal. New dioceses are springing up everywhere.
Churches are multiplying with astonishing rapidity. The discouraging
outlook in Europe is more, far more, than counterbalanced by our
wonderful progress in the United States. We might say that the
Vatican now rests upon American backs, for the United States send
more Peter's Pence to Rome than all other Catholic countries
together. We practically control her polls and her press. America was
discovered by Christopher Columbus, a Catholic in the service of a
Catholic ruler. It is Catholic in essence, and it shall so be
recognized! The Holy Catholic Church always has been and always will
be the sole and _only_ Christian authority. The Catholic religion by
rights ought to be, and ultimately shall be, the exclusively
dominant religion of the world, and every other sort of worship shall
be banished--interdicted--destroyed!"

For a while Jose heard no more. His ears burned and his brain
throbbed. He had become conscious of but one all-absorbing thought,
the fact of his vassalage to a world-embracing political system,
working in the name of the Christ. Not a new thought, by any
means--indeed an old one, often held--but now driven home to him most
emphatically. He forgot his clerical duties and sank into profound
revery on his inconsistent position in the office of the highest
functionary of Holy Church aside from the Supreme Pontiff himself.

He was aroused at length from his meditations by the departure of the
American Bishop. "It is true, as you report," the Papal Secretary was
saying earnestly. "America seems rife with modernism. Free-masonry,
socialism, and countless other fads and religious superstitions are
widely prevalent there. Nor do I underestimate their strength and
influence. And yet, I fear them not. There are also certain freak
religions, philosophical beliefs, wrung from the simple teachings of
our blessed Saviour, the rapid spread of which at one time did give me
some concern. The Holy Father mentioned one or two of them to-day, in
reference to his contemplated encyclical on modernism. But I now see
that they are cults based upon human personality; and with their
leaders removed, the fabrics will of themselves crumble."

He took leave of the Bishop, and turned again to address the
Cardinal-Bishop within. "A matter of the gravest import has arisen,"
he began in a low voice; "and one that may directly affect our
negotiations in regard to the support which the Holy Father will need
in case he issues a _pronunciamento_ that France, Spain, and Austria
shall no longer exercise the right of veto in papal elections. That
rumor regarding Isabella's daughter is again afloat. I have summoned
Father Rafael de Rincon to Rome to state what he knows. But--" He rose
and looked out through the door at Jose, bending over his littered
desk. Then he went back, and resumed his conversation with the
Cardinal-Bishop, but in a tone so low that Jose could catch only
disconnected scraps.

"What, Colombia?" he at length heard the Cardinal-Bishop exclaim.

"Yes," was the Secretary's reply. "And presumably at the instigation
of that busybody, Wenceslas Ortiz. Though what concern he might have
in the _Infanta_ is to me incomprehensible--assuming, of course, that
there is such a royal daughter."

"But--Colombia elects a President soon, is it not so?"

"On the eve of election now," replied the Secretary. "And if the
influence of Wenceslas with the Bishop of Cartagena is what I am
almost forced to admit that it is, then the election is in his hands.
But, the _Infanta_--" The sound of his voice did not carry the rest of
his words to Jose's itching ears.

An hour later the Secretary and the Cardinal-Bishop came out of the
room and left the office together. "Yes," the Secretary was saying,
"in the case of Wenceslas it was 'pull and percuniam' that secured him
his place. The Church did not put him there."

The Cardinal-Bishop laughed genially. "Then the Holy Ghost was not
consulted, I take it," he said.

"No," replied the Secretary grimly. "And he has so complicated the
already delicate situation in Colombia that I fear Congress will table
the bill prohibiting Free-masonry. It is to be deplored. Among all the
Latin Republics none has been more thoroughly Catholic than
Colombia."

"Is the Holy Father's unpublished order regarding the sale and
distribution of Bibles loyally observed there?" queried the
Cardinal-Bishop.

The door closed upon them and Jose heard no more. His day's duties
ended, he went to his room to write and reflect. But the intense
afternoon heat again drove him forth to seek what comfort he might
near the river. With his notebook in hand he went to the little park,
as was his frequent wont. An hour or so later, while he was jotting
down his remembrance of the conversation just overheard, together with
his own caustic and protesting opinions, his absorption was broken by
the strange child's accident. A few minutes later the notebook had
disappeared.

And now the thought of all this medley of personal material and secret
matters of Church polity falling into the hands of those who might
make capital of it, and thereby drag the Rincon honor through the
mire, cast the man prostrate in the dust.




CHAPTER 10


Days passed--days whose every dawn found the priest staring in
sleepless, wide-eyed terror at the ceiling above--days crowded with
torturing apprehension and sickening suggestion--days when his knees
quaked and his hands shook when his superiors addressed him in the
performance of his customary duties. No mental picture was too
frightful or abhorrent for him to entertain as portraying a possible
consequence of the loss of his journal. He cowered in agony before
these visions. He dared not seek the little park again. He feared to
show himself in the streets. He dreaded the short walk from his
dormitory to the Vatican. His life became a sustained torture--a
consuming agony of uncertainty, interminable suspense, fearful
foreboding. The cruelty of his position corroded him. His health
suffered, and his cassock hung like a bag about his emaciated form.

Then the filament snapped and the sword fell. On a dismal, rainy
morning, some two months after the incident in the park, Jose was
summoned into the private office of the Papal Secretary of State. As
the priest entered the small room the Secretary, sitting alone at his
desk, turned and looked at him long and fixedly.

"So, my son," he said in a voice that froze the priest's blood, "you
are still alive?" Then, taking up a paper-covered book of medium size
which apparently he had been reading, he held it out without comment.

Jose took it mechanically. The book was crudely printed and showed
evidence of having been hastily issued. It came from the press of a
Viennese publisher, and bore the startling title, "Confessions of a
Roman Catholic Priest." As in a dream Jose opened it. A cry escaped
him, and the book fell from his hands. _It was his journal!_

There are sometimes crises in human lives when the storm-spent mind,
tossing on the waves of heaving emotion, tugs and strains at the ties
which moor it to reason, until they snap, and it sweeps out into the
unknown, where blackness and terror rage above the fathomless deep.
Such a crisis had entered the life of the unhappy priest, who now held
in his shaking hand the garbled publication of his life's most sacred
thoughts. Into whose hands his notes had fallen on that black day when
he had sacrificed everything for an unknown child, he knew not. How
they had made their way into Austria, and into the pressroom of the
heretical modernist who had gleefully issued them, twisted,
exaggerated, but unabridged, he might not even imagine. The terrible
fact remained that there in his hands they stared up at him in hideous
mockery, his soul-convictions, his heart's deepest and most inviolable
thoughts, details of his own personal history, secrets of state--all
ruthlessly exposed to the world's vulgar curiosity and the rapacity of
those who would not fail to play them up to the certain advantages to
which they lent themselves all too well.

And there before him, too, were the Secretary's sharp eyes, burning
into his very soul. He essayed to speak, to rise to his own defense.
But his throat filled, and the words which he would utter died on his
trembling lips. The room whirled about him. Floods of memory began to
sweep over him in huge billows. The conflicting forces which had
culminated in placing him in the paradoxical position in which he now
stood raced before him in confused review. Objects lost their definite
outlines and melted into the haze which rose before his straining
eyes. All things at last merged into the terrible presence of the
Papal Secretary, as he slowly rose, tall and gaunt, and with arm
extended and long, bony finger pointing to the yellow river in the
distance, said in words whose cruel suggestion scorched the raw soul
of the suffering priest:

"My son, be advised: the Tiber covers many sins."

Then pitying oblivion opened wide her arms, and the tired priest sank
gently into them.




CHAPTER 11


Rome again lay scorching beneath a merciless summer sun. But the
energetic uncle of Jose was not thereby restrained from making another
hurried visit to the Vatican. What his mission was does not appear in
papal records; but, like the one which he found occasion to make just
prior to the ordination of his nephew, this visit was not extended to
include Jose, who throughout that enervating summer lay tossing in
delirium in the great hospital of the Santo Spirito. We may be sure,
however, that its influence upon the disposition of the priest's case
after the recent _denouement_ was not inconsiderable, and that it was
largely responsible for his presence before the Holy Father himself
when, after weeks of racking fever, wan and emaciated, and leaning
upon the arm of the confidential valet of His Holiness, the young
priest faced that august personage and heard the infallible judgment
of the Holy See upon his unfortunate conduct.

On the throne of St. Peter, in the heavily tapestried private audience
room of the great Vatican prison-palace, and guarded from intrusion by
armed soldiery and hosts of watchful ecclesiastics of all grades, sat
the Infallible Council, the Vicar-General of the humble Nazarene, the
aged leader at whose beck a hundred million faithful followers bent in
lowly genuflection. Near him stood the Papal Secretary of State and
two Cardinal-Bishops of the Administrative Congregation.

Jose dragged himself wearily before the Supreme Pontiff and bent low.

"_Benedicite_, my erring son." The soft voice of His Holiness floated
not unmusically through the tense silence of the room.

"Arise. The hand of the Lord already has been laid heavily upon you in
wholesome chastening for your part in this deplorable affair. And the
same omnipotent hand has been stretched forth to prevent the baneful
effects of your thoughtless conduct. We do not condemn you, my son. It
was the work of the Evil One, who has ever found through your
weaknesses easy access to your soul."

Jose raised his blurred eyes and gazed at the Holy Father in perplexed
astonishment. But the genial countenance of the patriarch seemed to
confirm his mild words. A smile, tender and patronizing, in which Jose
read forgiveness--and yet with it a certain undefined something which
augured conditions upon which alone penalty for his culpability would
be remitted--lighted up the pale features of the Holy Father and
warmed the frozen life-currents of the shrinking priest.

"My son," the Pontiff continued tenderly, "our love for our wandering
children is but stimulated by their need of our protecting care. Fear
not; the guilty publisher of your notes has been awakened to his
fault, and the book which he so thoughtlessly issued has been quite
suppressed."

Jose bent his head and patiently awaited the conclusion.

"You have lain for weeks at death's door, my son. The words which you
uttered in your delirium corroborated our own thought of your
innocence of intentional wrong. And now that you have regained your
reason, you will confess to us that your reports, and especially your
account of the recent conversation between the Cardinal-Secretary of
State and the Cardinal-Bishop, were written under that depression of
mind which has long afflicted you, producing a form of mental
derangement, and giving rise to frequent hallucination. It is this
which has caused us to extend to you our sympathy and protection. Long
and intense study, family sorrow, and certain inherited traits of
disposition, whose rapid development have tended to lack of normal
mental balance, account to us for those deeds of eccentricity on your
part which have plunged us into extreme embarrassment and yourself
into the illness which threatened your young life. Is it not so, my
son?"

The priest stared up at the speaker in bewilderment. This unexpected
turn of affairs had swept his defense from his mind.

"The Holy Father awaits your reply," the Papal Secretary spoke with
severity. His own thought had been greatly ruffled that morning, and
his patience severely taxed by a threatened mutiny among the Swiss
guards, whose demands in regard to the quantity of wine allowed them
and whose memorial recounting other alleged grievances he had just
flatly rejected. The muffled cries of "_Viva Garibaldi!_" as the
petitioners left his presence were still echoing in the Secretary's
ears, and his anger had scarce begun to cool.

"We are patient, my Cardinal-Nephew," the Pontiff resumed mildly. "Our
love for this erring son enfolds him." Then, turning again to Jose,
"We have correctly summarized the causes of your recent conduct, have
we not?"

The priest made as if to reply, but hesitated, with the words
fluttering on his lips.

"My dear son"--the Holy Father bent toward the wondering priest in an
attitude of loving solicitation--"our blessed Saviour was ofttimes
confronted with those possessed of demons. Did he reject them? No;
and, despite the accusations against us in your writings, for which we
know you were not morally responsible, we, Christ's representative on
earth, are still touched with his love and pity for one so unfortunate
as you. With your help we shall stop the mouths of calumny, and set
you right before the world. We shall use our great resources to save
the Rincon honor which, through the working of Satan within you, is
now unjustly besmirched. We shall labor to restore you to your right
mind, and to the usefulness which your scholarly gifts make possible
to you. We indeed rejoice that your piteous appeal has reached our
ears. We rejoice to correct those erroneous views which you, in the
temporary aberration of reason, were driven to commit to writing, and
which so unfortunately fell into the hands of Satan's alert
emissaries. Your ravings during these weeks of delirium shed much
light upon the obsessing thoughts which plunged you into mild
insanity. And they have stirred the immeasurable depths of pity within
us."

The Holy Father paused after this unwontedly long speech. A dumb sense
of stupefaction seemed to possess the priest, and he passed his
shrunken hands before his eyes as if he would brush away a mist.

"That this unfortunate book is but the uttering of delirium, we have
already announced to the world," His Holiness gently continued. "But
out of our deep love for a family which has supplied so many
illustrious sons to our beloved Church we have suppressed mention of
your name in connection therewith."

The priest started, as he vaguely sensed the impending issue. What was
it that His Holiness was about to demand? That he denounce his
journal, over his own signature, as the ravings of a man temporarily
insane? He was well aware that the Vatican's mere denial of the
allegations therein contained, and its attributing of them to a mad
priest, would scarcely carry conviction to the Courts of Spain and
Austria, or to an astonished world. But, for him to declare them the
garbled and unauthentic utterances of an aberrant mind, and to make
public such statement in his own name, would save the situation,
possibly the Rincon honor, even though it stultify his own.

His Holiness waited a few moments for the priest's reply; but
receiving none, he continued with deep significance:

"You will not make it necessary, we know, for us to announce that a
mad priest, a son of the house of Rincon, now confined in an asylum,
voiced these heretical and treasonable utterances."

The voice of His Holiness flowed like cadences of softest music,
charming in its tenderness, winning in its appeal, but momentous in
its certain implication.

"In our solicitude for your recovery we commanded our own physicians
to attend you. To them you owe your life. To them, too, we owe our
gratitude for that report on your case which reveals the true nature
of the malady afflicting you."

The low voice vibrated in rhythmic waves through the dead silence of
the room.

"To them also you now owe this opportunity to abjure the writings
which have caused us and yourself such great sorrow; to them you owe
this privilege of confessing before us, who will receive your
recantation, remit your unintentional sins, and restore you to honor
and service in our beloved Church."

Jose suddenly came to himself. Recant! Confess! In God's name, what?
Abjure his writings, the convictions of a lifetime!

"These writings, my son, are not your sane and rational convictions,"
the Pontiff suggested.

Jose still stood mute before him.

"You renounce them now, in the clear light of restored reason; and you
swear future lealty to us and to Holy Church," the aged Father
continued.

"Make answer!" commanded one of the Cardinal-Bishops, starting toward
the wavering priest. "Down on your knees before the Holy Father, who
waits to forgive your venial sin!"

Jose turned swiftly to the approaching Cardinal and held up a hand.
The man stopped short. The Pontiff and his associates bent forward in
eager anticipation. The valet fell back, and Jose stood alone. In that
tense mental atmosphere the shrinking priest seemed to be transformed
into a Daniel.

"No, Holy Father, you mistake!" His voice rang through the room like a
clarion. "I do not recant! My writings _do_ express my deepest and
sanest convictions!"

The Pontiff's pallid face went dark. The eyes of the other auditors
bulged with astonishment. A dumb spell settled over the room.

"Father, my guilt lies not in having recorded my honest convictions,
nor in the fact that these records fell into the hands of those who
eagerly grasp every opportunity to attack their common enemy, the
Church. It lies rather in my weak resistance to those influences which
in early life combined to force upon me a career to which I was by
temperament and instinct utterly disinclined. It lies in my having
sacrificed myself to the selfish love of my mother and my own
exaggerated sense of family pride. It lies in my still remaining
outwardly a priest of the Catholic faith, when every fiber of my soul
revolts against the hypocrisy!"

"You are a subject of the Church!" the Papal Secretary interrupted.
"You have sworn to her and to the Sovereign Pontiff as loyal and
unquestioning obedience as to the will of God himself!"

Jose turned upon him. "Before my ordination," he cried, "I was a
voluntary subject of the Sovereign of Spain. Did that ceremony render
me an unwilling subject of the Holy Father? Does the ceremony of
ordination constitute the Romanizing of Spain? No, I am not a subject
of Rome, but of my conscience!"

Another dead pause followed, in which for some moments nothing
disturbed the oppressive silence. Jose looked eagerly into the
delicate features of the living Head of the Church. Then, with
decreased ardor, and in a voice tinged with pathos, he continued:

"Father, my mistakes have been only such as are natural to one of
my peculiar character. I came to know, but too late, that my
life-motives, though pure, found not in me the will for their
direction. I became a tool in the hands of those stronger than
myself. For what ultimate purpose, I know not. Of this only am I
certain, that my mother's ambitions, though selfish, were the only
pure motives among those which united to force the order of
priesthood upon me."

"Force!" burst in one of the Cardinal-Bishops. "Do you assume to make
the Holy Father believe that the priesthood can be _forced_ upon a
man? You assumed it willingly, gladly, as was your proper return for
the benefits which the Mother Church had bestowed upon you!"

"In a state of utmost confusion, bordering a mental breakdown, I
assumed it--outwardly," returned the priest sadly, "but my heart never
ceased to reject it. Once ordained, however, I sought in my feeble way
to study the needs of the Church, and prepare myself to assist in the
inauguration of reforms which I felt she must some day undertake."

The Pontiff's features twitched with ill-concealed irritation at this
confession; but before he could speak Jose continued:

"Oh, Father, and Cardinal-Princes of the Church, does not the need of
your people for truth wring your hearts? Turn from your zealous dreams
of world-conquest and see them, steeped in ignorance and superstition,
wretched with poverty, war, and crime, extending their hands to you as
their spiritual leaders--to you, Holy Father, who should be their
Moses, to smite the rock of error, that the living, saving truth may
gush out!"

He paused, as if fearful of his own rushing thought. Then: "Is not the
past fraught with lessons of deepest import to us? Is not the Church
being rejected by the nations of Europe because of our intolerance,
our oppression, our stubborn clinging to broken idols and effete forms
of faith? We are now turning from the wreckage which the Church has
wrought in the Old World, and our eyes are upon America. But can we
deceive ourselves that free, liberty-loving America will bow her neck
to the mediaeval yoke which the Church would impose upon her? Why, oh,
why cannot we see the Church's tremendous opportunities for good in
this century, and yield to that inevitable mental and moral
progression which must sweep her from her foundations, unless she
conform to its requirements and join in the movement toward universal
emancipation! Our people are taught from childhood to be led; they are
willing followers--none more willing in the world! But why lead them
into the pit? Why muzzle them with fear, oppress them with threats,
fetter them with outworn dogma and dead creed? Why continue to dazzle
them with pagan ceremonialism and oriental glamour, and then, our
exactions wrung from them, leave them to consume with disease and
decay with moral contagion?"

"The man is mad with heresy!" muttered the Pontiff, turning to the
Cardinal-Bishops.

"No, it is not I who is mad with heresy, but the Holy Church, of which
you are the spiritual Head!" cried the priest, his loud voice
trembling with indignation and his frail body swaying under his
rapidly growing excitement. "She is guilty of the damnable heresy
of concealing knowledge, of hiding truth, of stifling honest
questionings! She is guilty of grossest intolerance, of deadliest
hatred, of impurest motives--she, the self-constituted, self-endowed
spiritual guide of mankind, arrogating to herself infallibility,
superiority, supreme authority--yea, the very voice of God himself!"

The priest had now lost all sense of environment, and his voice waxed
louder as he continued:

"The conduct of the Church throughout the centuries has made her
the laughing-stock of history, an object of ridicule to every man
of education and sense! She is filled with superstition--do you not
know it? She is permeated with pagan idolatry, fetishism, and
carnal-mindedness! She is pitiably ignorant of the real teachings of
the Christ! Her dogmas have been formed by the subtle wits of Church
theologians. They are in this century as childish as her political
and social schemes are mischievous! Why have we formulated our
doctrine of purgatory? Why so solicitous about souls in purgatorial
torment, and yet so careless of them while still on earth? Where is
our justification for the doctrine of infallibility? Is liberty to
think the concession of God, or of the Holy Father? Where, oh,
where is the divine Christ in our system of theology? Is he to be
found in materialism, intolerance, the burning of Bibles, in
hatred of so-called heretics, and in worldly practices? Are we not
keeping the Christ in the sepulcher, refusing to permit him to
arise?"

His speech soared into the impassioned energy of thundered denunciation.

"Yes, Holy Father, and Cardinal-Bishops, I _am_ justified in
criticizing the Holy Catholic Church! And I am likewise justified in
condemning the Protestant Church! All have fallen woefully short of
the glory of God, and none obeys the simple commands of the Christ.
The Church throughout the world has become secularized, and worship is
but hollow consistency in the strict performance of outward acts of
devotion. Our religion is but a hypocritical show of conformity. Our
asylums, our hospitals, our institutions of charity? Alas! they but
evidence our woeful shortcoming, and our persistent refusal to rise
into the strength of the healing, saving Christ, which would render
these obsolete institutions unnecessary in the world of to-day! The
Holy Catholic Church is but a human institution. Its worldliness, its
scheming, its political machinations, make me shudder--!"

"Stop, madman!" thundered one of the Cardinal-Bishops, rushing upon
the frail Jose with such force as to fell him to the floor. The
Pontiff had risen, and sunk again into his chair. The valet hurried to
his assistance. The Papal Secretary, his face contorted with rage, and
his throat choking with the press of words which he strove to utter,
hastened to the door to summon help. "Remove this man!" he commanded,
pointing out the prostrate form of Jose to the two Swiss guards who
had responded to his call. "Confine him! He is violent--a raging
maniac!"

A few days later, Padre Jose de Rincon, having been pronounced by the
Vatican physicians mentally deranged, as the result of acute cerebral
anaemia, was quietly conveyed to a sequestered monastery at
Palazzola.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Two summers came, and fled again before the chill winds which blew
from the Alban hills. Then one day Jose's uncle appeared at the
monastery door with a written order from His Holiness, effecting the
priest's conditional release. Together they journeyed at once to
Seville, the uncle alert and energetic as ever, showing but slight
trace of time's devastating hand; Jose, the shadow of his former self
physically, and his mind clouded with the somber pall of melancholia.

Toward the close of a quiet summer, spent with his mother in his
boyhood home, Jose received from his uncle's hand another letter,
bearing the papal insignia. It was evident that it was not unexpected,
for it found the priest with his effects packed and ready for a
considerable journey. A hurried farewell to his mother, and the
life-weary Jose, combining innocence and misery in exaggerated
proportions, and still a vassal of Rome, set out for the port of
Cadiz. There, in company with the Apostolic Delegate and Envoy
Extraordinary to the Republic of Colombia, he embarked on the West
Indian trader Sarnia, bound for Cartagena, in the New World.




CHAPTER 12


There is no region in the Western Hemisphere more invested with the
spirit of romance and adventure than that strip of Caribbean coast
stretching from the Cape of Yucatan to the delta of the Orinoco and
known as the Spanish Main. No more superb setting could have been
chosen for the opening scenes of the New World drama. Skies of profoundest
blue--the tropical sun flaming through massive clouds of vapor--a sea
of exuberant color, foaming white over coral beaches--waving cocoa
palms against a background of exotic verdure marking a tortuous shore
line, which now rises sheer and precipitous from the water's edge to
dizzy, snowcapped, cloud-hung heights, now stretches away into vast
reaches of oozy mangrove bog and dank cinchona grove--here flecked with
stagnant lagoons that teem with slimy, crawling life--there flattened
into interminable, forest-covered plains and untrodden, primeval
wildernesses, impenetrable, defiant, alluring--and all perennially bathed
in dazzling light, vivid color, and soft, fragrant winds--with
everywhere redundant foliage--humming, chattering, screaming
life--profusion--extravagance--prodigality--riotous waste! Small wonder
that when this enticing shore was first revealed to the astonished
_Conquistadores_, where every form of Nature was wholly different from
anything their past experience afforded, they were childishly receptive to
every tale, however preposterous, of fountains of youth, of magical
lakes, or enchanted cities with mountains of gold in the depths of the
frowning jungle. They had come with their thought attuned to enchantment;
their minds were fallow to the incredible; they were fresh from their
conquest of the vast _Mare Tenebrosum_, with its mysteries and terrors.
At a single stroke from the arm of the intrepid Genoese the mediaeval
superstitions which peopled the unknown seas had fallen like fetters
from these daring and adventurous souls. The slumbering spirit of
knight-errantry awoke suddenly within their breasts; and when from their
frail galleons they beheld with ravished eyes this land of magic and
alluring mystery which spread out before them in such gorgeous
panorama, they plunged into the glittering waters with waving swords
and pennants, with shouts of praise and joy upon their lips, and
inaugurated that series of prodigious enterprise, extravagant deeds of
hardihood, and tremendous feats of prowess which still remain
unsurpassed in the annals of history for brilliancy, picturesqueness,
and wealth of incident.

With almost incredible rapidity and thoroughness the Spanish arms
spread over the New World, urged by the corroding lust of gold and the
sharp stimulus afforded by the mythical quests which animated the
simple minds of these hardy searchers for the Golden Fleece. Neither
trackless forests, withering heat, miasmatic climate nor savage
Indians could dampen their ardor or check their search for riches and
glory. They penetrated everywhere, steel-clad and glittering, with
lance and helmet and streaming banner. Every nook, every promontory of
a thousand miles of coast was minutely searched; every island was
bounded; every towering mountain scaled. Even those vast regions of
New Granada which to-day are as unknown as the least explored parts of
darkest Africa became the scenes of stirring adventure and brilliant
exploit of these daring crusaders of more than three centuries ago.

The real wonders yielded by this newly discovered land of enchantment
far exceeded the fabled Manoa or El Dorado of mythical lore; and the
adventurous expeditions that were first incited by these chimeras soon
changed into practical colonizing and developing projects of real and
permanent value. Amazing discoveries were made of empires which had
already developed a state of civilization, mechanical, military, and
agricultural, which rivaled those of Europe. Natural resources were
revealed such as the Old World had not even guessed were possible.
Great rivers, vast fertile plains, huge veins of gold and copper ore,
inexhaustible timber, a wealth of every material thing desired by man,
could be had almost without effort. Fortunate, indeed, was the Spanish
_Conquistador_ in the possession of such immeasurable riches;
fortunate, indeed, had he possessed the wisdom to meet the supreme
test of character which this sudden accession of wealth and power was
to bring!

With the opening of the vast treasure house flanked by the Spanish
Main came the Spaniard's supreme opportunity to master the world.
Soon in undisputed possession of the greater part of the Western
Hemisphere; with immeasurable wealth flowing into his coffers;
sustained by dauntless courage and an intrepid spirit of adventure;
with papal support, and the learning and genius of the centuries at
his command, he faced the opportunity to extend his sway over the
entire world and unite all peoples into a universal empire, both
temporal and spiritual. That he failed to rise to this possibility
was not due to any lack of appreciation of his tremendous opportunity,
nor to a dearth of leaders of real military genius, but to a
misapprehension of the great truth that the conquest of the world is
not to be wrought by feats of arms, but by the exercise of those
moral attributes and spiritual qualities of heart and soul which he
did not possess--or possessing, had prostituted to the carnal
influences of lust of material riches and temporal power.

In the immediate wake of the Spanish _Conqueros_ surged the drift and
flotsam of the Old World. Cities soon sprang up along the Spanish Main
which reflected a curious blend of the old-time life of Seville and
Madrid with the picturesque and turbulent elements of the adventurer
and buccaneer. The spirit of the West has always been synonymous with
a larger sense of freedom, a shaking off of prejudice and tradition
and the trammels of convention. The sixteenth century towns of the New
World were no exception, and their streets and _plazas_ early
exhibited a multicolored panorama, wherein freely mingled knight and
predaceous priest, swashbuckler and staid _hidalgo_, timid Indian and
veiled _doncella_--a potpourri of merchant, prelate, <DW64>, thief, the
broken in fortune and the blackened in character--all poured into the
melting pot of the new West, and there steaming and straining,
scheming and plotting, attuned to any pitch of venturesome project, so
be it that gold and fame were the promised emoluments thereof.

And gold, and fame of a certain kind, were always to be had by those
whose ethical code permitted of a little straining. For the great
ships which carried the vast wealth of this new land of magic back to
the perennially empty coffers of Old Spain constituted a temptation
far more readily recognized than resisted. These huge, slow-moving
galleons, gilded and carved, crawling lazily over the surface of the
bright tropical sea, and often so heavily freighted with treasure as
to be unsafe in rough weather, came to be regarded as special
dispensations of Providence by the cattle thieves and driers of beef
who dwelt in the pirates' paradise of Tortuga and Hispaniola, and
little was required in way of soul-alchemy to transform the
_boucanier_ into the lawless and sanguinary, though picturesque,
corsair of that romantic age. The buccaneer was but a natural
evolution from the peculiar conditions then obtaining. Where human
society in the process of formation has not yet arrived at the
necessity of law to restrain the lust and greed of its members; and
where at the same time untold wealth is to be had at the slight cost
of a few lives; and, too, where even the children are taught that
whosoever aids in the destruction of Spanish ships and Spanish lives
renders a service to the Almighty, the buccaneer must be regarded as
the logical result. He multiplied with astonishing rapidity in these
warm, southern waters, and not a ship that sailed the Caribbean was
safe from his sudden depredations. So extensive and thorough was his
work that the bed of the Spanish Main is dotted with traditional
treasure ships, and to this day remnants of doubloons or "pieces of
eight" and bits of bullion and jewelry are washed up on the shining
beaches of Panama and northern Colombia as grim memorials of his
lawless activities.

The expenditure of energy necessary to transport the gold, silver and
precious stones from the New World to the bottomless treasury of Spain
was stupendous. Yet not less stupendous was the amount of treasure
transported. From the distant mines of Potosi, from the Pilcomayo,
from the almost inaccessible fastnesses of what are now Bolivia and
Ecuador, a precious stream poured into the leaking treasure box of
Spain that totalled a value of no less than ten billion dollars. Much
of the wealth which came from Peru was shipped up to the isthmus of
Panama, and thence transferred to plate-fleets. But the buccaneers
became so active along the Pacific coast that water shipment was
finally abandoned, and from that time transportation had to be made
overland by way of the Andean plateau, sometimes a distance of two
thousand miles, to the strongholds which were built to receive and
protect the treasure until the plate-fleets could be made up. Of these
strongholds there were two of the first importance, the old city of
Panama, on the isthmus, and the almost equally old city of Cartagena,
on the northern coast of what is now the Republic of Colombia.

The spirit of ancient Carthage must have breathed upon this "Very
Royal and Loyal City" which Pedro de Heredia in the sixteenth century
founded on the north coast of New Granada, and bequeathed to it a
portion of its own romance and tragedy. Superbly placed upon a narrow,
tongue-shaped islet, one of a group that shield an ample harbor from
the sharp tropical storms which burst unheralded over the sea without;
girdled by huge, battlemented walls, and guarded by frowning
fortresses, Cartagena commanded the gateway to the exhaustless wealth
of the _Cordilleras_, at whose feet she still nestles, bathed in
perpetual sunshine, and kissed by cool ocean breezes which temper the
winds blowing hot from the steaming _llanos_ of the interior. By the
middle of the sixteenth century she offered all that the adventurous
seeker of fame and fortune could desire, and attracted to herself not
only the chivalry, but the beauty, wealth and learning which, mingled
with rougher elements, poured into the New World so freely in the
opening scenes of the great drama inaugurated by the arrival of the
tiny caravels of Columbus a half century before.

The city waxed quickly rich and powerful. Its natural advantages of
location, together with its massive fortifications, and its wonderful
harbor, so extensive that the combined fleets of Spain might readily
have found anchorage therein, early rendered it the choice of the
Spanish monarch as his most dependable reservoir and shipping point
for the accumulated treasure of his new possessions. The island upon
which the city arose was singularly well chosen for defense. Fortified
bridges were built to connect it with the mainland, and subterranean
passageways led from the great walls encircling it to the impregnable
fortress of San Felipe de Barajas, on Mount San Lazaro, a few hundred
yards back of the city and commanding the avenues and approaches of
the land side. To the east, and about a mile from the walls, the
abrupt hill of La Popa rises, surmounted by the convent of Santa
Candelaria, likewise connected by underground tunnels to the interior
of the city, and commanding the harbor and its approaches from the
sea. The harbor formerly connected with the open sea through two
entrances, the Boca Grande, a wide, fortified pass between the island
of Tierra Bomba and the tongue on which the city stands, and the Boca
Chica, some nine miles farther west, a narrow, tortuous pass, wide
enough to permit entry to but a single vessel at a time, and commanded
by forts San Fernando and San Jose.

By the middle of the seventeenth century Cartagena, "Queen of the
Indies and Queen of the Seas," had expanded into a proud and beautiful
city, the most important mart of the New World. Under royal patronage
its merchants enjoyed a monopoly of commerce with Spain. Under the
special favor of Rome it became an episcopal See, and the seat of the
Holy Inquisition. Its docks and warehouses, its great centers of
commerce, its sumptuous dwellings, its magnificent Cathedral, its
colleges and monasteries, and its proud aristocracy, all reflected the
spirit of enterprise which animated its sons and found expression in a
city which could boast a pride, a culture, and a wealth almost
unrivalled even in the Old World.

But, not unlike her ancient prototype, Cartagena succumbed to the very
influences which had made her great. Her wealth excited the cupidity
of freebooters, and her power aroused the jealousy of her formidable
rivals. Her religion itself became an excuse for the plundering hands
of Spain's enemies. Again and again the city was called upon to defend
the challenge which her riches and massive walls perpetually issued.
Again and again she was forced to yield to the heavy tributes and
disgraceful penalties of buccaneers and legalized pirates who, like
Drake, came to plunder her under royal patent. Cartagena rose and
fell, and rose again. But the human heart which throbs beneath the
lash of lust or revenge knows no barriers. Her great forts availed
nothing against the lawless hordes which swarmed over them. Neither
were her tremendous walls proof against starvation. Again and again,
her streets filled with her gaunt dead, she stubbornly held her gates
against the enemies of Spain who assaulted her in the name of
religion, only at last to weaken with terror and throw them open in
disgraceful welcome to the French de Pontis and his maudlin, rag-tag
followers, who drained her of her last drop of life blood. As her
gates swung wide and this nondescript band of marauders streamed in
with curses and shouts of exultation, the glory of this royal
mediaeval city passed out forever.

Almost from its inception, Cartagena had been the point of attack of
every enterprise launched with the object of wresting from Spain her
rich western possessions, so much coveted by her jealous and
revengeful rivals. It was Spain herself who fought for very existence
while Cartagena was holding her gates against the enemies of Holy
Church. And these enemies knew that they had pierced the Spanish heart
when the "Queen of the Indies" fell. And in no small measure did Spain
deserve the fate which overtook her. For, had it not been for the
stupendous amount of treasure derived from these new possessions, the
dramatic and dominant part which she played in the affairs of Europe
during the sixteenth century would have been impossible. This treasure
she wrested from her South American colonies at a cost in the
destruction of human life, in the outraging of human instincts, in
the debauching of ideals and the falsifying of hope, in hellish
oppression and ghastly torture, that can never be adequately
estimated. Her benevolent instruments of colonization were cannon and
saintly relics. Her agents were swaggering soldiers and bigoted
friars. Her system involved the impression of her language and her
undemonstrable religious beliefs upon the harmless aborigines. The
fruits of this system, which still linger after three centuries, are
superstition, black ignorance, and woeful mental retardation. To the
terrified aborigines the boasted Spanish civilization meant little
more than "gold, liquor, and sadness." Small wonder that the simple
Indians, unable to comprehend the Christian's lust for gold, poured
the molten metal down the throats of their captives, crying, "Eat,
Christian, eat!" They had borrowed their ideals from the Christian
Spaniards, who by means of the stake and rack were convincing them
that God was not in this western land until they came, bringing their
debauched concept of Christianity.

And so Cartagena fell, late in the seventeenth century, never to
regain more than a shadow of her former grandeur and prestige. But
again she rose, in a semblance of her martial spirit, when her native
sons, gathering fresh courage and inspiration from the waning powers
of the mother-country in the early years of the century just closed,
organized that federation which, after long years of almost hopeless
struggle, lifted the yoke of Spanish misrule from New Granada and
proclaimed the Republic of Colombia. Cartagena was the first city of
Colombia to declare its independence from Spain. And in the great war
which followed the "Heroic City" passed through terrible vicissitudes,
emerging from it still further depleted and sunken, a shell of massive
walls and battered defenses, with desolated homes and empty streets
echoing the tread of the mendicant _peon_.

As the nineteenth century, so rich in invention, discovery, and
stirring activity in the great States to the north, drew to a close, a
chance visitor to this battle-scarred, mediaeval city would have found
her asleep amid the dreams of her former greatness. Approaching from
the harbor, especially if he arrived in the early hours of morning,
his eyes would have met a view of exquisite beauty. Seen thus, great
moss-grown structures rise from within the lofty encircling walls,
with many a tower and gilded dome glittering in the clear sunlight and
standing out in sharp relief against the green background of
forest-plumed hills and towering mountains. The abysmal blue of the
untainted tropical sky overhead contrasts sharply with the red-tiled
roofs and dazzling white exteriors of the buildings beneath; and the
vivid tints, mingling with the iridescence of the scarcely rippling
waters of the harbor, blend into a color scheme of rarest loveliness
in the clear atmosphere which seems to magnify all distant objects and
intensify every hue.

A closer approach to the citadel which lies within the landlocked
harbor reveals in detail the features of the stupendous walls which
guard this key to Spain's former treasure house. Their immensity and
their marvelous construction bear witness to the genius of her famous
military engineers, and evoke the same admiration as do the great
temples and monuments of ancient Egypt. These grim walls, in places
sixty feet through, and pierced by numerous gates, are frequently
widened into broad esplanades, and set here and there with bastions
and watch towers to command strategic points. At the north end of the
city they expand into an elaborately fortified citadel, within which
are enormous fresh water tanks, formerly supplied by the rains, and
made necessary by the absence of springs so near the coast. Within the
walls at various points one finds the now abandoned barracks,
storerooms, and echoing dungeons, the latter in the days of the
stirring past too often pressed into service by the Holy Inquisition.
Underground tunnels, still intact, lead from the walls to the
Cathedral, the crumbling fortress of San Felipe de Barajas, and the
deserted convent on the summit of La Popa. Time-defying, grim,
dramatic reliques of an age forever past, breathing poetry and romance
from every crevice--still in fancy echoing from moldering tower and
scarred bulwark the clank of sabre, the tread of armored steed, and
the shouts of exulting _Conquistadores_--aye, their ghostly echoes
sinking in the fragrant air of night into soft whispers, which bear to
the tropical moon dark hints of ancient tragedies enacted within these
dim keeps and gloom-shrouded tunnels!

The pass of Boca Grande--"large mouth"--through which Drake's band of
marauders sailed triumphantly in the latter part of the sixteenth
century, was formerly the usual entrance to the city's magnificent
harbor. But its wide, deep channel, only two miles from the city
walls, afforded too easy access to undesirable visitors in the heyday
of freebooters; and the harassed Cartagenians, wearied of the
innumerable piratical attacks which this broad entrance constantly
invited, undertook to fill it up. This they accomplished after years
of heroic effort and an enormous expenditure of money, leaving the
harbor only the slender, tortuous entrance of Boca Chica--"little
mouth"--dangerous to incoming vessels because of the almost torrential
flow of the tide through it, but much more readily defended. The two
castles of San Fernando and San Jose, frowning structures of stone
dominating this entrance, have long since fallen into disuse, but are
still admirably preserved. Beneath the former, and extending far below
the surface of the water, is the old Bastile of the Inquisition,
occasionally pressed into requisition now to house recalcitrant
politicians, and where no great effort of the imagination is required
still to hear the groans of the tortured and the sighs of the
condemned, awaiting in chains and _san benitos_ the approaching _auto
da fe_.

But the greater distance from the present entrance of the harbor to
the city walls affords the visitor a longer period in which to enjoy
the charming panorama which seems to drift slowly out to meet him as
he stands entranced before it. The spell of romance and chivalry is
upon him long ere he disembarks; and once through the great gateway of
the citadel itself, he yields easily to the ineluctable charm which
seems to hover in the balmy air of this once proud city. Everywhere
are evidences of ancient grandeur, mingling with memories of enormous
wealth and violent scenes of strife. The narrow, winding streets,
characteristic of oriental cities; the Moorish architecture displayed
in the grandiose palaces and churches; the grated, unglazed windows,
through which still peep timid _senoritas_, as in the romantic days of
yore; the gaily painted balconies, over which bepowdered _doncellas_
lean to pass the day's gossip in the liquid tongue of Cervantes, all
transport one in thought to the chivalrous past, when this picturesque
survival of Spain's power in America was indeed the very Queen of the
western world and the proud boast of the haughty monarchs of Castile.

Nor was the city more dear to the Spanish King than to the spiritual
Sovereign who sat on Peter's throne. The Holy See strove to make
Cartagena the chief ecclesiastical center of the New World; and
churches, monasteries, colleges, and convents flourished there as
luxuriantly as the tropical vegetation. The city was early elevated to
a bishopric. A magnificent Cathedral was soon erected, followed by
other churches and buildings to house ecclesiastical orders, including
the Jesuit college, the University, the women's seminary, and the
homes for religious orders of both sexes. The same lavish expenditure
of labor and wealth was bestowed upon the religious structures as on
the walls and fortifications. The Cathedral and the church of San Juan
de Dios, the latter the most conspicuous structure in the city, with
its double towers and its immense monastery adjoining, became the
special recipients of the liberal outpourings of a community rich not
only in material wealth, but in culture and refinement as well. The
latter church in particular was the object of veneration of the
patrons of America's only Saint, the beneficent Pedro Claver, whose
whitened bones now repose in a wonderful glass coffin bound with
strips of gold beneath its magnificent marble altar. In the central
_plaza_ of the city still stands the building erected to house the
Holy Inquisition, so well preserved that it yet serves as a dwelling.
Adjacent to it, and lining the _plaza_, are spacious colonial
edifices, once the homes of wealth and culture, each shaded by
graceful palms and each enclosing its inner garden, or patio, where
tropical plants and aromatic shrubs riot in richest color and
fragrance throughout the year.

In the halcyon days of Cartagena's greatness, when, under the
protection of the powerful mother-country, her commerce extended to
the confines of the known world, her streets and markets presented a
scene of industry and activity wholly foreign to her in these latter
days of her decadence. From her port the rich traffic which once
centered in this thriving city moved, in constantly swelling volume,
in every direction. In her marts were formulated those audacious plans
which later took shape in ever-memorable expeditions up the Magdalena
and Cauca rivers in search of gold, or to establish new colonies and
extend the city's sphere of influence. From her gates were launched
those projects which had for their object the discovery of the
mysterious regions where rivers were said to flow over sands of pure
gold and silver, or the kingdom of El Dorado, where native potentates
sprinkled their bodies with gold dust before bathing in the streams
sacred to their deities. From this city the bold Quesada set out on
the exploits of discovery and conquest which opened to the world the
rich plateau of Bogota, and ranked him among the greatest of the
_Conquistadores_. In those days a canal had been cut through the
swamps and dense coast lowlands to the majestic Magdalena river, some
sixty-five miles distant, where a riverine town was founded and given
the name of Calamar, the name Pedro de Heredia had first bestowed upon
Cartagena. Through this _dique_ the city's merchant vessels passed to
the great arterial stream beyond, and thence some thousand miles south
into the heart of the rich and little known regions of upper Colombia.
To-day, like the grass-grown streets of the ancient city, this canal,
choked with weeds and _debris_, is but a green and turbid pool, but
yet a reminder of the faded glory of the famous old town which played
such a dramatic _role_ in that age of desperate courage.

In the finished town of Cartagena Spain's dreams of imperial pomp and
magnificence were externalized. In her history the tragedy of the
New World drama has been preserved. To-day, sunk in decadence,
surrounded by the old mediaeval flavor, and steeped in the romance of
an age of chivalry forever past, her muniments and donjons, her
gray, crenelated walls and time-defying structures continue to express
that dogged tenacity of belief and stern defiance of unorthodox
opinion which for two hundred years maintained the Inquisition
within her gates and sacrificed her fair sons and daughters to an
undemonstrable creed. The heavy air of ecclesiasticism still hangs
over her. The priests and monks who accompanied every sanguinary
expedition of the _Conquistadores_, ready at all times to absolve
any desperado who might slay a harmless Indian in the name of Christ,
have their successors to-day in the astute and untiring sons of
Rome, who conserve the interests of Holy Church within these
battered walls and guard their portals against the entrance of radical
thought. Heredia had scarcely founded the city when King Philip sent
it a Bishop. And less than a decade later the Cathedral, which to-day
stands as the center of the episcopal See, was begun.

The Cathedral, though less imposing than the church of San Juan de
Dios, is a fine example of the ecclesiastical architecture of the
colonial era. Occupying a central position in the city, its
ever-open doors invite rich and poor alike, citizen and stranger,
to enter and linger in the refreshing atmosphere within, where the
subdued light and cool shadows of the great nave and chapels afford a
grateful respite from the glare and heat of the streets without.
Massive in exterior appearance, and not beautiful within, the
Cathedral nevertheless exhibits a construction which is at once
broad, simple and harmonious. The nave is more than usually wide
between its main piers, and its rounded arches are lofty and well
proportioned. Excellent portraits of former Bishops adorn its white
walls, and narrow rectangular windows at frequent intervals admit
a dim, mellow light through their dark panes. Before one of these
windows--apparently with no thought of incongruity in the exhibition
of such a gruesome object attached to a Christian church--there
has been affixed an iron grating, said to have served the Holy
Inquisition as a gridiron on which to roast its heretical victims.
Within, an ambulatory, supported on the first tier of arches,
affords a walk along either side of the nave, and leads to the
winding stairway of the bell tower. At one end of this ambulatory,
its entrance commanding a full view of the nave and the _capilla
mayor_, with its exquisitely carved marble altar, is located the
Bishop's _sanctum_. It was here that the young Spanish priest, Jose de
Rincon, stood before the Bishop of Cartagena on the certain midday
to which reference was made in the opening chapter of this recital,
and received with dull ears the ecclesiastical order which removed
him still farther from the world and doomed him to a living burial
in the crumbling town of Simiti, in the wilderness of forgotten
Guamoco.




CHAPTER 13


"At last, you come!"

The querulous tones of the aged Bishop eddied the brooding silence
within the Cathedral. Without waiting for a reply he turned again to
his table and took up a paper containing a list of names.

"You wait until midday," he continued testily; "but you give me time
to reflect and decide. The parish of Simiti has long been vacant. I
have assigned you to it. The Honda touches at Calamar to-morrow, going
up-river. You will take it."

"Simiti! Father--!"

"_Bien_; and would you dispute this too!" quavered the ill-humored
Bishop.

"But--Simiti--you surely cannot mean--!"

The Bishop turned sharply around. "I mean that after what I learn from
Rome I will not keep you here to teach your heresies in our
University! I mean that after what I hear this morning of your evil
practices I will not allow you to spend another day in Cartagena!" The
angry ecclesiastic brought his bony fist hard against the table to
emphasize the remark.

"_Madre de Dios!_" he resumed, after some moments of nursing his
choleric feelings. "Would you debate further! The Holy Father for some
unexplained reason inflicts a madman upon me! And I, innocent of what
you are, obey his instructions and place you in the University--with
what result? You have the effrontery--the madness--to lecture to your
classes on the heresies of Rome!"

"But--"

"And as if that were not burden enough for these old shoulders, I must
learn that I have taken a serpent to my bosom--but that you are still
sane enough to propagate heresies--to plot revolution with the
Radicals--and--shame consume you!--to wantonly ruin the fair daughters
of our diocese! But, do you see now why I send you where you can do
less evil than here in Cartagena?"

The priest slowly petrified under the tirade.

"The fault is not mine if I must act without instruction from
Rome," the Bishop went on petulantly. "Twice have I warned you
against your teachings--but I did not suspect then, for only
yesterday did I learn that before coming to me you had been confined
in a monastery--insane! But--_Hombre_! when you bring the blush of
shame to my cheeks because of your godless practices--it is time
to put you away without waiting for instruction!"

Godless practices! Was the Bishop or the priest going mad?

"Go now to your room," the Bishop added, turning again to his table.
"You have little enough time to prepare for your journey. Wenceslas
will give you letters to the Alcalde of Simiti."

Wenceslas! The priest's thought flew back over the events of the
morning. Marcelena--Maria--the encounter below with--! _Dios!_ Could
it be that Wenceslas had fastened upon him the stigma of his own
crime? The priest found his tongue.

"Father!--it is untrue!--these charges are false as hell!" he
exclaimed excitedly. "I demand to know who brings them against me!"

The testy Bishop's wrath flared up anew. "You demand! Am I to sit here
and be catechised by _you_? It is enough that I know what occurs in my
diocese, and am well informed of your conduct!"

The doorway darkened, and the priest turned to meet the object of his
suspecting thought.

Bestowing a smile of patronage upon Jose, and bowing obsequiously
before the Bishop, Wenceslas laid some papers upon the table,
remarking as he did so, "The letters, Your Grace, to introduce our
Jose to his new field. Also his instructions and expense money."

"Wenceslas!" The priest confronted him fiercely. "Do you accuse me
before the Bishop?"

"Accuse, _amigo_?" Wenceslas queried in a tone of assumed surprise.
"Have I not said that your ready tongue and pen are your accusers?
But," with a conciliatory air, "we must remember that our good Bishop
mercifully views your conduct in the light of your recent mental
affliction, traces of which, unfortunately, have lingered to cause him
sorrow. And so he graciously prepares a place for you, _caro amigo_,
where rest and relief from the strain of teaching will do you much
good, and where life among simple and affectionate people will restore
you, he hopes, to soundness of mind."

The priest turned again to the Bishop in a complexity of appeal. The
soft speech of Wenceslas, so full of a double _entendu_, so markedly
in contrast with the Bishop's harsh but at least sincere tirade, left
no doubt in his mind that he was now the victim of a plot, whose
ramifications extended back to the confused circumstances of his early
life, and the doubtful purposes of his uncle and his influence upon
the sacerdotal directors in Rome. And he saw himself a helpless and
hopelessly entangled victim.

"Father!" In piteous appeal Jose held out his hands to the Bishop, who
had turned his back upon him and was busy with the papers on his
table.

"_Amigo_, the interview is ended," said Wenceslas quietly, stepping
between the priest and his superior.

Jose pushed wildly past the large form of Wenceslas and seized the
Bishop's hand.

"_Santa Maria!_" cried the petulant churchman. "Do you obey me, or no?
If not, then leave the Church--and spend your remaining days as a
hounded ex-priest and unfrocked apostate," he finished significantly.
"Go, prepare for your journey!"

Wenceslas slipped the letter and a few _pesos_ into the hand of the
smitten, bewildered Jose, and turning him to the door, gently urged
him out and closed it after him.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Just why the monastery gates had opened to him after two years'
deadening confinement, Jose had not been apprised. All he knew was
that his uncle had appeared with a papal appointment for him to the
University of Cartagena, and had urged his acceptance of it as the
only course likely to restore him both to health and position, and to
meet the deferred hopes of his sorrowing mother.

"Accept it, _sobrino mio_," the uncle had said. "Else, pass your
remaining days in confinement. There can be no refutation of the
charges against you. But, if these doors open again to you, think not
ever to sever your connection with the Church of Rome. For, if the
Rincon honor should prove inadequate to hold you to your oath, be
assured that Rincon justice will follow you until the grave wipes out
the stain upon our fair name."

"Then, _tio mio_, let the Church at once dismiss me, as unworthy to be
her son!" pleaded Jose.

"What, excommunication?" cried the horrified uncle. "Never! Death
first! Are you still mad?"

Jose looked into the cold, emotionless eyes of the man and shuddered.
The ancient spirit of the Holy Inquisition lurked there, and he
cowered before it. But at least the semblance of freedom had been
offered him. His numbed heart already had taken hope. He were indeed
mad not to acquiesce in his uncle's demands, and accept the proffered
opportunity to leave forever the scenes of his suffering and disgrace.
And so he bowed again before the inexorable.

Arriving in Cartagena some months before this narrative opens, he had
gradually yielded himself to the restorative effects of changed
environment and the hope which his uncle's warm assurances aroused,
that a career would open to him in the New World, unclouded by the
climacteric episode of the publishing of his journal and his
subsequent arrogant bearing before the Holy Father, which had provoked
his fate. Under the beneficent influences of the soft climate and the
new interests of this tropic land he began to feel a budding of
something like confidence, and the suggestions of an unfamiliar
ambition to retrieve past failure and yet gratify, even if in small
measure, the parental hope which had first directed him as a child
into the fold of the Church. The Bishop had assigned him at once to
pedagogical work in the University; and in the teaching of history,
the languages, and, especially, his beloved Greek, Jose had found an
absorption that was slowly dimming the memory of the dark days which
he had left behind in the Old World.

But the University had not afforded him the only interest in his new
field. He had not been many weeks on Colombian soil when his awakening
perceptions sensed the people's oppression under the tyranny of
ecclesiastical politicians. Nor did he fail to scent the approach of a
tremendous conflict, in which the country would pass through violent
throes in the struggle to shake off the galling yoke of Rome.
Maintaining an attitude of strict neutrality, he had striven quietly
to gauge the anticlerical movement, and had been appalled to find it
so widespread and menacing. Only a miracle could save unhappy Colombia
from being rent by the fiercest of religious wars in the near future.
Oh, if he but had the will, as he had the intellectual ability, to
throw himself into the widening breach!

"There is but one remedy," he murmured aloud, as he sat one evening on
a bench in the _plaza_ of Simon Bolivar, watching the stream of gaily
dressed promenaders parading slowly about on the tesselated walks, but
hearing little of their animated conversation.

"And what is that, may I ask, friend?"

The priest roused up with a start. He had no idea that his audible
meditations had been overheard. Besides, he had spoken in English. But
this question had been framed in the same tongue. He looked around. A
tall, slender man, with thin, bronzed face and well-trimmed Van <DW18>
beard, sat beside him. The man laughed pleasantly.

"Didn't know that I should find any one here to-night who could speak
my lingo," he said cordially. "But, I repeat, what is the remedy?"

"Christianity," returned the amazed Jose, without knowing what he
said.

"And the condition to be remedied?" continued the stranger.

"This country's diseased--but to whom have I the honor of speaking?"
drawing himself up a little stiffly, and glancing about to see who
might be observing them.

"Oh, my credentials?" laughed the man, as he caught Jose's wondering
look. "I'm quite unknown in Cartagena, unfortunately. You must pardon
my Yankee inquisitiveness, but I've watched you out here for several
evenings, and have wondered what weighty problems you were wrestling
with. A quite unpardonable offense, from the Spanish viewpoint, but
wholly forgivable in an uncouth American, I'm sure. Besides, when I
heard you speak my language it made me a bit homesick, and I wanted to
hear more of the rugged tongue of the Gentiles."

Laughing again good-naturedly, he reached into an inner pocket and
drew out a wallet. "My name's Hitt," he said, handing Jose his card.
"But I didn't live up to it. That is, I failed to make a hit up north,
and so I'm down here." He chuckled at his own facetiousness. "Amos A.
Hitt," he went on affably. "There used to be a 'Reverend' before it.
That was when I was exploring the Lord's throne. I've dropped it, now
that I'm humbly exploring His footstool instead."

Jose yielded to the man's friendly advances. This was not the first
American he had met; yet it seemed a new type, and one that drew him
strongly.

"So you think this country diseased, eh?" the American continued.

Jose did not answer. While there was nothing in the stranger's
appearance and frank, open countenance to arouse suspicion, yet he
must be careful. He was living down one frightful mistake. He could
not risk another. But the man did not wait for a reply.

"Well, I'm quite agreed with you. It has _priest-itis_." He stopped
and looked curiously at Jose, as if awaiting the effect of his bold
words. Then--"I take it you are not really one of 'em?"

Jose stared at the man in amazement. Hitt laughed again. Then he drew
forth a cigar and held it out. "Smoke?" he said. The priest shook his
head. Hitt lighted the cigar himself, then settled back on the bench,
his hands jammed into his trousers pockets, and his long legs stuck
straight out in front, to the unconcealed annoyance of the passers-by.
But, despite his _brusquerie_ and his thoughtlessness, there was
something about the American that was wonderfully attractive to the
lonely priest.

"Yes, sir," Hitt went on abstractedly in corroboration of his former
statement, "Colombia is absolutely stagnant, due to Jesuitical
politics, the bane of all good Catholic countries. If she could shake
off priestcraft she'd have a chance--provided she didn't fall into
orthodox Protestantism."

Jose gasped, though he strove to hide his wonder. "You--" he began
hesitatingly, "you were in the ministry--?"

"Yes. Don't be afraid to come right out with it. I was a Presbyterian
divine some six years ago, in Cincinnati. Ever been there?"

Jose assured him that he had never seen the States.

"H'm," mused the ex-preacher; "great country--wonderful--none like it
in the world! I've been all over, Europe, Asia, Africa--seen 'em all.
America's the original Eden, and our women are the only true
descendants of mother Eve. No question about it, that apple incident
took place up in the States somewhere--probably in Ohio."

Jose caught the man's infectious humor and laughed heartily. Surely,
this American was a tonic, and of the sort that he most needed. "Then,
you are--still touring--?"

"I'm exploring," Hitt replied. "I'm here to study what ancient records
I may find in your library; then I shall go on to Medellin and Bogota.
I'm on the track of a prehistoric Inca city, located somewhere in the
Andes--and no doubt in the most inaccessible spot imaginable.
Tradition cites this lost city as the cradle of Inca civilization.
Tampu Tocco, it is called in their legends, the place from which the
Incas went out to found that marvelous empire which eventually
included the greater part of South America. The difficulty is," he
added, knotting his brows, "that the city was evidently unknown to the
Spaniards. I can find no mention of it in Spanish literature, and I've
searched all through the libraries of Spain. My only hope now is that
I shall run across some document down here that will allude to it, or
some one who has heard likely Indian rumors."

Jose rubbed his eyes and looked hard at the man. "Well!" he
ejaculated, "you are--if I may be permitted to say it--an original
type."

"I presume I am," admitted the American genially. "I've been all sorts
of things in my day, preacher, teacher, editor. My father used to be a
circuit rider in New England forty years ago or more. Pious--good
Lord! Why, he was one of the kind who believe the good book 'from
kiver to kiver,' you know. Used to preach interminable sermons about
the mercy of the Lord in holding us all over the smoking pit and not
dropping us in! Why, man! after listening to him expound the
Scriptures at night I used to go to bed with my hair on end and my
skin all goose-flesh. No wonder I urged him to send me to the
Presbyterian Seminary!"

"And you were ordained?" queried Jose, dark memories rising in his own
thought.

"Thoroughly so! And glad I was of it, too, for I had grown up as pious
and orthodox as my good father. I considered the ordination a through
ticket to paradise."

"But--now--"

"Oh, I found myself in time," continued the man, answering Jose's
unspoken thought. "Then I stopped preaching beautiful legends, and
tried to be genuinely helpful to my congregation. I had a fine church
in Cincinnati at that time. But--well, I mixed a trifle too much
heresy into my up-to-date sermons, I guess. Anyway, the Assembly
didn't approve my orthodoxy, and I had as little respect for its
heterodoxy, and the upshot of it was that I quit--cold." He laughed
grimly as he finished the recital. "But," he went on gravely, "I now
see that it was due simply to my desire to progress beyond the
acceptance of tradition and allegory as truth, and to find some better
foundation upon which to build than the undemonstrable articles of
faith embraced in the Westminster Confession. To me, that confession
of faith had become a confession of ignorance." He turned his shrewd
eyes upon Jose. "I was in somewhat the same mental state that I think
you are in now," he added.

"And why, if I may ask, are you now exploring?" asked Jose,
disregarding the implication.

"Oh, as for that," replied the American easily, "I used to teach
history and became especially interested in ancient civilizations,
lost cities, and the like, in the Western Hemisphere. Long before I
left the ministry oil was struck on our little Pennsylvania farm,
and--well, I didn't have to work after that. So for some years I've
devoted myself strictly to my particular hobby of travel. And in my
work I find it necessary to discard ceremony, and scrape acquaintance
with all sorts and conditions. I especially cultivate clergymen. I've
wanted to know you ever since I first saw you out here. But I couldn't
wait for a formal introduction. And so I broke in unceremoniously upon
your meditations a few moments ago."

"I am grateful to you for doing so," said Jose frankly, holding out a
hand. "There is much that you can tell me--much that I want to know.
But--" He again looked cautiously around.

"Ah, I understand," said Hitt, quickly sensing the priest's
uneasiness. "What say you, shall we meet somewhere down by the city
wall? Say, at the old Inquisition cells?"

Jose nodded his acquiescence, and they separated. A few minutes later
the two were seated in one of the cavernous archways of the long,
echoing corridor which leads to the deserted barracks and the gloomy,
bat-infested cells beneath. A vagrant breeze drifted now and then
across the grim wall above them, and the deserted road in front lay
drenched in the yellow light of the tropic moon. There was little
likelihood of detection here, where the dreamy plash of the sea
drowned the low sound of their voices; and Jose breathed more freely
than in the populous _plaza_ which they had just left.

"Good Lord!" muttered the explorer, returning from a peep into the
foul blackness of a subterranean tunnel, "imagine what took place here
some three centuries ago!"

"Yes," returned Jose sadly; "and in the reeking dungeons of San
Fernando, out there at the harbor entrance. And, what is worse, my own
ancestors were among the perpetrators of those black deeds committed
in the name of Christ."

"Whew! You don't say! Tell me about it." The explorer drew closer.
Jose knew somehow that he could trust this stranger, and so he briefly
sketched his ancestral story to his sympathetic listener. "And no one
knows," he concluded in a depressed tone, "how many of the thousands
of victims of the Inquisition in Cartagena were sent to their doom by
the house of Rincon. It may be," he sighed, "that the sins of my
fathers have been visited upon me--that I am now paying in part the
penalty for their criminal zeal."

The explorer sat for some time in silent meditation. "Perhaps," he
said, "your family fell under the spell of old Saint Dominic. You
know the legend? How God deliberated long whether to punish the
wickedness of mankind by sending down war, plague, or famine, and was
finally prevailed upon by Saint Dominic to send, instead, the Holy
Inquisition. Another choice example of the convenient way the
world has always had of attributing the foulest deeds of men to the
Almighty. No wonder religion has so woefully declined!"

"But is it so up in the great North?" asked Jose. "Tell me, what is
the religious status there? My limitations have been such that I
have--I have not kept abreast of current theological thought."

"In the United States the conventional, passive submission to
orthodox dogma is rapidly becoming a thing of the past," the explorer
replied. "The people are beginning to think on these topics. All
human opinion, philosophical, religious, or scientific, is in a
state of liquefaction--not yet solidified. Just what will crystallize
out of the magma is uncertain. The country is experiencing a
religious crisis, and an irresistible determination to _know_ is
abroad in the land. Everything is being turned upside-down, and one
hardly dares longer say what he believes, for the dogma of to-day is
the fairy-tale of to-morrow. And, through it all, as some one has
tersely said, 'orthodoxy is hanging onto the coat-tails of progress in
a vain attempt to stop her.' We are facing in the United States
the momentous question, Is Christianity a failure? Although no one
knows what Christianity really is. But one thing is certain, the
brand of Christianity handed out by Protestant and Catholic alike is
mighty close to the borderline of dismal failure."

"But is there in the North no distinct trend in religious belief?"
queried Jose.

The explorer hesitated. "Yes," he said slowly, "there is. The man who
holds and promulgates any belief, religious or scientific, is being
more and more insistently forced to the point of demonstration. The
citation of patristic authority is becoming daily more thoroughly
obsolete."

"And there is no one who demonstrates practical Christianity?"

"No. Do you? Is there any one in your Church, or in the Protestant
faith, who does the works which Christ is reported to have done? Is
there any one who really tries to do them? Or thinks he could if he
tried? The good church Fathers from the third century down could
figure out that the world was created on the night before the
twenty-third of October, four thousand and four B. C., and that Adam's
fall occurred about noon of the day he was created. They could dilate
_ad nauseam_ on transubstantiation, the divine essence, and the
mystery of the Trinity; they could astonishingly allegorize the Bible
legends, and read into every word a deep, hidden, incomprehensible
sense; they could prove to their own satisfaction that Adam composed
certain of the Psalms; that Moses wrote every word of the Pentateuch,
even the story of his own death and burial; and that the entire Bible
was delivered by God to man, word for word, just as it stands,
including the punctuation. And yet, not one of them followed the
simple commands of Jesus closely enough to enable him to cure a
toothache, to say nothing of generally healing the sick and raising
the dead! Am I not right?"

"Yes--I am sorry to have to admit," murmured Jose.

"Well," went on the explorer, "that's what removed me from the
Presbyterian ministry. It is not Christianity that is a dismal
failure, but men's interpretation of it. Of true Christianity, I
confess I know little. Oh, I'm a fine preacher! And yet I am
representative of thousands of others, like myself, all at sea. Only,
the others are either ashamed or afraid to make this confession. But,
in my case, my daily bread did not depend upon my continuance in the
pulpit."

"But supposing that it had--"

"The result doubtless would have been the same. The orthodox faith was
utterly failing to supply me with a satisfying interpretation of
life, and it afforded me no means of escaping the discords of mundane
existence. It could only hold out an undemonstrable promise of a life
after death, provided I was elected, and provided I did not too
greatly offend the Creator during the few short years that I might
spend on earth. If I did that, then, according to the glorious
Westminster Confession, I was doomed--for we are not so fortunate as
you in having a purgatory from which we may escape through the
suffrages of the faithful," he concluded with a chuckle.

Jose knew, as he listened, that his own Church would hold this man a
blasphemer. The man by his own confession was branded a Protestant
heretic. And he, Jose, was _anathema_ for listening to these sincere,
brutally frank confidences, and tendering them his warm sympathy. Yet
he sat spellbound.

"And so I retired from the ministry," continued the explorer. "I had
become ashamed of tearing down other men's religious beliefs. I was
weary of having to apologize constantly for the organization to which
I was attached. At home I had been taught a devout faith in revealed
religion; in the world I was thrown upon its inquiring doubts; I
yearned for faith, yet demanded scientific proof. Why, I would have
been satisfied with even the slight degree of proof which we are able
to advance for our various physical sciences. But, no, it was not
forthcoming. I must believe because the Fathers had believed. I
struggled between emotion and reason, until--well, until I had to
throw it all over to keep from going mad."

Jose bowed in silence before this recital of a soul-experience so
closely paralleling his own.

"But, come," said the explorer cheerily, "I'm doing all the talking.
Now--"

"No! no!" interrupted the eager Jose. "I do not wish to talk. I want
to hear you. Go on, I beg of you! Your words are like rain to a
parched field. You will yet offer me something upon which I can build
with new hope."

"Do not be so sanguine, my friend," returned the explorer in a kindly
tone. "I fear I shall be only the reaper, who cuts the weeds and
stubble, and prepares the field for the sower. I have said that I am
an explorer. But my field is not limited to this material world. I am
an explorer of men's thoughts as well. I am in search of a religion. I
manifest this century's earnest quest for demonstrable truth. And so I
stop and question every one I meet, if perchance he may point me in
the right direction. My incessant wandering about the globe is, if I
may put it that way, but the outward manifestation of my ceaseless
search in the realm of the soul."

He paused. Then, reaching out and laying a hand upon the priest's
knee, he said in a low, earnest voice, "My friend, _something_
happened in that first year of our so-called Christian era. What it
was we do not know. But out of the smoke and dust, the haze and mist
of that great cataclysm has proceeded the character Jesus--absolutely
unique. It is a character which has had a terrific influence upon the
world ever since. Because of it empires have crumbled; a hundred
million human lives have been destroyed; and the thought-processes of
a world have been overthrown or reversed. Just what he said, just what
he did, just how he came, and how he went, we may not know with any
high degree of accuracy. But, beneath all the myth and legend, the
lore and childish human speculation of the intervening centuries,
there _must_ be a foundation of eternal truth. And it must be
broad--very broad. I am digging for it--as I dug on the sites of
ancient Troy and Babylon--as I have dug over the buried civilizations
of Mexico and Yucatan--as I shall dig for the hidden Inca towns on the
wooded heights of the Andes. And while I dig materially I am also
digging spiritually."

"And what have you found?" asked Jose hoarsely.

"I am still in the overburden of _debris_ which the sedulous, tireless
Fathers heaped mountain high upon the few recorded teachings of Jesus.
But already I see indications of things to come that would make the
members of the Council of Trent and the cocksure framers of the
Westminster Confession burst from their graves by sheer force of
astonishment! There are even now foreshadowings of such revolutionary
changes in our concept of God, of the universe, of matter, and the
human mind, of evil, and all the controverted points of theological
discussion of this day, as to make me tremble when I contemplate them.
In my first hasty judgment, after dipping into the 'Higher Criticism,'
I concluded that Jesus was but a charlatan, who had learned
thaumaturgy in Egypt and practiced it in Judea. Thanks to a better
appreciation of the same 'Higher Criticism' I am reconstructing my
concept of him now, and on a better basis. I once denounced God as the
creator of both good and evil, and of a man who He knew must
inevitably fall, even before the clay of which he was made had become
fairly dry. I changed that concept later to Matthew Arnold's 'that
something not ourselves that makes for righteousness.' But mighty few
to-day recognize such a God! Again, in Jesus' teaching that sin
brought death into the world, I began to see what is so dimly
foreshadowed to-day, the _mental_ nature of all things. 'Sin' is the
English translation of the original '_hamartio_,' which means, 'to
miss the mark,' a term used in archery. Well, then, missing the mark
is the mental result of nonconformity to law, is it not? And, going
further, if death is the result of missing the mark, and that is
itself due to mental cause, and, since death results from sickness,
old age, or catastrophe, then these things must likewise be mental.
Sickness, therefore, becomes wholly mental, does it not? Death becomes
mental. Sin is mental. Spirit, the Creator, is mental. Matter is
mental. And we live and act in a mental realm, do we not? The sick
man, then, becomes one who misses the mark, and therefore a sinner. I
think you will agree with me that the sick man is not at peace with
God, if God is 'that which makes for righteousness.' Surely the maker
of that old Icelandic sixteenth-century Bible must have been inspired
when, translating from Luther's Bible, he wrote in the first chapter
of Genesis, 'And God created man after His own likeness, in the
likeness of _Mind_ shaped He him.' Cannot you see the foreshadowing to
which I have referred?"

Jose kept silence. The current of his thought seemed about to swerve
from its wonted course.

"What is coming is this," continued the explorer earnestly, "a
tremendous broadening of our concept of God, a more exalted, a more
worthy concept of Him as spirit--or, if you will, as mind. An
abandonment of the puerile concept of Him as a sort of magnified man,
susceptible to the influence of preachers, or of Virgin and Saints,
and yielding to their petitions, to their higher sense of justice, and
to money-bought earthly ceremonies to lift an imaginary curse from His
own creatures. And with it will come that wonderful consciousness of
Him which I now begin to realize that Jesus must have had, a
consciousness of Him as omnipotent, omnipresent good. As I to-day read
the teachings of Jesus I am constrained to believe that he was
conscious _only_ of God and God's spiritual manifestation. And in that
remarkable consciousness the man Jesus realized his own life--indeed,
that consciousness _was_ his life--and it included no sense of evil.
The great lesson which I draw from it is that evil must, therefore, be
utterly unreal and non-existent. And heaven is but the acquisition of
that mind or consciousness which was in Christ Jesus."

"But, Mr. Hitt, such ideas are revolutionary!"

"True, if immediately and generally adopted. And so you see why the
Church strives to hold the people to its own archaic and innocuous
religious tenets; why your Church strives so zealously to hold its
adherents fast to the rules laid down by pagan emperors and ignorant,
often illiterate churchmen, in their councils and synods; and why the
Protestant church is so quick to denounce as unevangelical everything
that does not measure to its devitalized concept of Christianity. They
do not practice what they preach; yet they would not have you
practice anything else. The human mind that calls itself a Christian
is a funny thing, isn't it?"

He laughed lightly; then lapsed into silence. The sea breeze rose and
sighed among the great, incrusted arches. The restless waves moaned in
their eternal assault upon the defiant walls. The moon clouded, and a
warm rain began to fall. Jose rose. "I must return to the dormitory,"
he announced briefly. "When you pass me in the _plaza_ to-morrow
evening, come at once to this place. I will meet you here. You have--I
must--"

But he did not finish. Pressing the explorer's hand, he turned
abruptly and hurried up the dim, narrow street.




CHAPTER 14


All through the following day the priest mused over the conversation
of the preceding night. The precipitation with which this new
friendship had been formed, and the subsequent abrupt exchange of
confidences, had scarcely impressed him as unusual. He was wholly
absorbed by the radical thought which the man had voiced. He mulled
over it in his wakeful hours that night. He could not prevent it from
coloring the lecture which he delivered to his class in ancient
history that day. And when the sun at length dropped behind La Popa,
he hurried eagerly to the _plaza_. A few minutes later he and the
ex-clergyman met in the appointed rendezvous.

"I dropped in to have a look at the remains of Pedro Claver to-day,"
his new friend remarked. "The old sexton scraped and bowed with huge
joy as he led me behind the altar and lighted up the grewsome thing. I
suppose he believed that Pedro's soul was up in the clouds making
intercession with the Lord for him, while he, poor devil, was toting
tourists around to gaze at the Saint's ghastly bones in their glass
coffin. The thing would be funny were it not for its sad side, namely,
the dense and superstitious ignorance in which such as this poor
sexton are held all their lives by your Church. It's a shame to feed
them with the bones of dead Saints, instead of with the bread of life!
But," he reflected, "I was myself just as bigoted at one time. And my
zeal to convert the world to Protestantism was just as hot as any that
ever animated the missionaries of your faith."

He paused and looked quizzically at Jose. He seemed to be studying the
length to which he could go in his criticism of the ancient faith of
the house of Rincon. But Jose remained in expectant silence.

"Speaking of missionaries," the man resumed, "I shall never forget an
experience I had in China. My wealthy and ultra-aristocratic
congregation decided that I needed rest, and so sent me on a world
tour. It was a member of that same congregation, by the way, a stuffy
old dame whose wealth footed up to millions, who once remarked to me
in all confidence that she had no doubt the aristocracy of heaven was
composed of Presbyterians. Poor, old, empty-headed prig! What could I
do but assure her that I held the same comforting conviction! Well,
through influential friends in Pekin I was introduced to the eminent
Chinese statesman, Wang Fo, of delightful memory. Our conversation
turned on religion, and then I made the most inexcusable _faux pas_
that a blithering Yankee could make, that of expressing regret that he
was not of our faith. Good heavens! But he was the most gracious
gentleman in the world, and his biting rebuke was couched in tones of
silken softness.

"'What is it that you offer me?' he said mildly. 'Blind opinion?
Undemonstrated and undemonstrable theory? Why, may I ask, do you
come over here to convert us heathen, when your own Christian land
is rife with evil, with sedition, with religious hatred of man for
man, with bloodshed and greed? If your religious belief is true,
then you can demonstrate it--prove it beyond doubt. Do you say
that the wonderful material progress which your great country
manifests is due to Christianity? I answer you, no. It is due to
the unfettering of the human mind, to the laying off of much of
the mediaeval superstition which in the past ages has blighted
mankind. It is due largely to the abandonment of much of what you
are still pleased to call Christianity. The liberated human mind
has expanded to a degree never before seen in the world. We Chinese
are still mentally fettered by our stubborn resistance to change,
to progression. Your great inventors and your great men of finance
are but little hampered by religious superstition. Hence the
mental flights which they so boldly undertake, and the stupendous
achievements they attain. Is it not so?'

"What could I say? He had me. But he hadn't finished me quite.

"'I once devoted much time to the study of Chemistry,' he went on
blandly, 'and when I tell you that there is a law to the effect that
the volume of a gas is a function of its pressure I do so with the
full knowledge that I can furnish you indisputable proof therefor. But
when you come to me with your religious theories, and I mildly request
your proofs, you wish to imprison or hang me for doubting the
absurdities which you cannot establish!'

"He laughed genially, then took me kindly by the arm. 'Proof, my
zealous friend, proof,' he said. 'Give me proof this side of the grave
for what you believe, and then you will have converted the heathen.
And can your Catholic friend--or, shall I say enemy?--prove his
laughable doctrine of purgatory? The dead in purgatory dependent upon
the living! Why, I tell him, that smacks of Shintoism, wherein the
living feed the dead! Then he points in holy indignation to the Bible.
Bah! Cannot I prove anything I may wish from your Bible? What will
you have? Polygamy? Incest? Murder? Graft? Hand me your Bible, and
I will establish its divinity. No, my good friend. When you come to
me with proofs that you really do the works of him whom you profess
to follow, then will I gladly listen, for I, too, seek truth. But
in the present deplorable absence of proofs I take much more comfort
in the adoration of my amiable ancestors than I could in your
laughable and undemonstrable religious creeds.'

"I left his presence a saddened but chastened man, and went home to do
a little independent thinking. When I approached my Bible without the
bias of the Westminster Confession I discovered that it did serve
admirably as a wardrobe in which to hang any sort of religious
prejudice. Continued study made me see that religious faith is
generally mere human credulity. I discovered that in my pitying
contempt for those of differing belief I much resembled the Yankee who
ridiculed a Chinaman for wearing a pig-tail. 'True,' the Celestial
replied, 'we still wear the badge of our former slavery. But you
emancipated Americans, do you not wear the badge of a present and much
worse form of slavery in your domination by Tammany Hall, by your
corrupt politicians, and your organizers and protectors of crime?'

"As time passed I gradually began to feel much more kindly toward Matthew
Arnold, who said, 'Orthodox theology is an immense misunderstanding of
the Bible.' And I began likewise to respect his statement that our Bible
language is 'fluid and passing'--that much of it is the purest poetry,
beautiful and inspiring, but symbolical."

"But," broke in Jose, "you must admit that there is something awfully
wrong with the world, with--"

"Well," interrupted Hitt, "and what is it? As historical fact, that
story about Adam and Eve eating an apple and thereby bringing down
God's curse upon the whole innocent human race is but a figment of
little minds, and an insult to divine intelligence. But, as
symbolizing the dire penalty we pay for a belief in the reality of
both good and evil--ah, that is a note just beginning to be sounded in
the world at large. And it may account for the presence of the world's
evil."

"Yet, our experience certainly shows that evil is just as real and
just as immanent as good! And, indeed, more powerful in this life."

"If so," replied the explorer gravely, "then God created or instituted
it. And in that case I must break with God."

"Then you think it is all a question of our own individual idea of
God?"

"Entirely. And human concepts of Him have been many and varied. But
that worst of Old Testament interpreters of the first century, Philo,
came terribly close to the truth, I think, when, in a burst of
inspiration, he one day wrote: 'Heaven is mind, and earth is
sensation.' Matthew Arnold, I think, likewise came very close to the
truth when he said that the only God we can recognize is 'that
something not ourselves that makes for righteousness.' And, as for
evil, up in the United States there are some who are now lumping it
all under the head of 'mortal mind,' considering it all but the 'one
lie' which Jesus so often referred to, and regarding it as the
'suppositional opposite' of the mind that is God, and so, powerless.
Not a bad idea, I think. But whether the money-loving Yankee will ever
leave his mad chase for gold long enough to live this premise and so
demonstrate it, is a question. I'm watching its development with
intense interest. We in the States have wonderful, exceptional
opportunities for study and research. We ought to uncover the truth,
if any people should."

He fell into thoughtfulness again. Jose drew a long sigh. "I wish--I
wish," he murmured, "that I might go there--that I might live and work
and search up there."

The explorer roused up. "And why not?" he asked abruptly. "Look here,
come with me and spend a year or so digging around for buried Inca
towns. Then we will go back to the States. Why, man! it would make you
over. I'll take you as interpreter. And in the States I'll find a
place for you. Come. Will you?"

For a moment the doors of imagination swung wide, and in the burst of
light from within Jose saw the dreams of a lifetime fulfilled.
Emancipation lay that way. Freedom, soul-expansion, truth. It was his
God-given privilege. Who had the right to lay a detaining hand upon
him? Was not his soul his own, and his God's?

Then a dark hand stole out from the surrounding shadows and closed the
doors. From the blackness there seemed to rise a hollow voice,
uttering the single word, _Honor_. He thrust out an arm, as if to ward
off the assaults of temptation. "No, no," he said aloud, "I am bound
to the Church!"

"But why remain longer in an institution with which you are quite out
of sympathy?" the explorer urged.

"First, to help the Church. Who will uplift her if we desert her? And,
second, to help this, my ancestral country," replied Jose in deep
earnestness.

"Worthy aims, both," assented Hitt. "But, my friend, what will you
accomplish here, unless you can educate these people to think? I have
learned much about conditions in this country. I find that the priest
in Colombia is even more intolerant than in Ireland, for here he has a
monopoly, no competition. He is absolute. The Colombian is the logical
product of the doctrines of Holy Church. It is so in Mexico. It is so
wherever the curse of a fixed mentality is imposed upon a people. For
that engenders determined opposition to mobility. It quenches
responsiveness to new concepts and new ideas. It throttles a nation.
The bane of mental progress is the _Semper Idem_ of your Church."

"Christianity will remove the curse."

"I have no doubt whatever of that. It probably is the future cure for
all social ills and evils of every sort. But if so, it must be the
Christianity which Jesus taught and demonstrated--not the theological
chaff now disseminated in his name. Do not forget that we no longer
know what Christianity is. It is a lost science."

"It can and will be recovered!" cried Jose warmly.

"I have said that is foreshadowed. But we must have the whole garment
of the Christ, without human _addenda_. He is reported as having said,
'The works that I do bear witness of me.' Now the works of the
Christian Church bear ample witness that she has not the true
understanding of the Christ. Nor has that eminent Protestant divine,
now teaching in a theological seminary in the States, who recently
said that, although Jesus ministered miraculously to the physical man,
yet it was not his intention that his disciples should continue that
sort of ministry; that the healing which Jesus did was wholly
incidental, and was not an example to be permanently imitated. Good
heavens! how these poor theologians hide their inability to do the
works of the Master by taking refuge in such ridiculously unwarranted
assertions. To them the rule seems to be that, if you can't do a thing
you must deny the possibility of its being done. Great logic, isn't
it?

"And yet," he went on, "the Church has had nearly two thousand years
in which to learn to do the works of the Master. Pretty dull pupil, I
think. And we've had nearly two thousand years of theology from this
slow pupil. Would that she would from now on give us a little real
Christianity! Heavens! the world needs it. And yet, do you know,
sectarian feeling is still so bitter in the so-called Church of God
that if a Bishop of the Anglican Church should admit Presbyterians,
Methodists, or members of other denominations to his communion table a
scream of rage would go up all over England, and a mighty demand would
be raised to impeach the Bishop for heresy! Think of it! God above!
the puny human mind. Do you wonder that the dogma of the Church has
lost force? That, despite its thunders, thinking men laugh? I freely
admit that our great need is to find an adequate substitute for the
authority which others would like to impose upon us. But where shall
we find such authority, if not in those who demonstrate their ability
to do the works of the Master? Show me your works, and I'll show you
my faith. This is my perpetual challenge.

"But, now," he said, "returning to the subject so near your heart: the
condition of this country is that of a large part of South America,
where the population is unsettled, even turbulent, and where a
priesthood, fanatical, intolerant, often unscrupulous, pursue their
devious means to extend and perpetuate unhindered the sway of your
Church. Colombia is struggling to remove the blight which Spain laid
upon her, namely, mediaeval religion. It is this same blighting
religion, coupled with her remorseless greed, which has brought Spain
to her present decrepit, empty state. And how she did strive to force
that religion upon the world! Whole nations, like the Incas, for
example, ruthlessly slaughtered by the papal-benisoned riffraff of
Spain in her attempts to foist herself into world prestige and to
bolster up the monstrous assumptions of Holy Church! The Incas were a
grand nation, with a splendid mental viewpoint. But it withered under
the touch of the mediaeval narrowness fastened upon it. Whole nations
wasted in support of papal assumptions--and do you think that the end
is yet? Far from it! War is coming here in Colombia. It may come in
other parts of this Western Hemisphere, certainly in Mexico, certainly
in Peru and Bolivia and Chili, rocked in the cradle of Holy Church for
ages, but now at last awaking to a sense of their backward condition
and its cause. If ever the Church had a chance to show what she could
do when given a free hand, she has had it in these countries,
particularly in Mexico. In all the nearly four centuries of her
unmolested control in that fair land, oppressed by sword and crucifix,
did she ever make an attempt worth the name to uplift and emancipate
the common man? Not one. She took his few, hard-earned _pesos_ to get
his weary soul out of an imagined purgatory--but she left him to rot
in peonage while on earth! But, friend, I repeat, the struggle is
coming here in Colombia. And look you well to your own escape when it
arrives!"

"And can I do nothing to help avert it?" cried the distressed Jose.

"Well," returned the explorer meditatively, "such bondage is removable
either through education or war. But in Colombia I fear the latter
will overtake the former by many decades."

"Then rest assured that I shall in the meantime do what in me lies to
instruct my fellow-countrymen, and to avoid such a catastrophe!"

"Good luck to you, friend. And--by the way, here is a little book that
may help you in your work. I'm quite sure you've never read it. Under
the ban, you know. Renan's _Vie de Jesus_. It can do you no harm, and
may be useful."

Jose reached out and took the little volume. It was _anathema_, he
knew, but he could not refuse to accept it.

"And there is another book that I strongly recommend to you. I'm sorry
I haven't a copy here. It once created quite a sensation. It is
called, 'Confessions of a Roman Catholic Priest.' Published
anonymously, in Vienna, but unquestionably bearing the earmarks of
authenticity. It mentions this country--"

Without speaking, Jose had slowly risen and started down the musty
corridor, his thought aflame with the single desire to get away. Down
past the empty barracks and gaping cells he went, without stopping to
peer into their tenebrous depths--on and on, skirting the grim walls
that typified the mediaevalism surrounding and fettering his restless
thought--on to the long incline which led up to the broad esplanade on
the summit. Must he forever flee this pursuing Nemesis? Or should he
hurl himself from the wall, once he gained the top? At the upper end
of the incline he heard the low sound of voices. A priest and a young
girl who sat there on the parapet rose as he approached. He stopped
abruptly in front of them. "Wenceslas!" he exclaimed. "And Maria!"

"Ah, _amigo_, a quiet stroll before retiring? It is a sultry night."

"Yes," slowly replied Jose, looking at the girl, who drew back into
the shadow cast by the body of her companion. Then, bowing, he passed
on down the wall and disappeared in the darkness that shrouded the
distance.

A few minutes later the long form of the explorer appeared above the
incline. Wenceslas and the girl had departed. Seeing no one, the
American turned and descended to the ground, shaking his head in deep
perplexity.




CHAPTER 15


The next day was one of the Church's innumerable feast-days, and Jose
was free to utilize it as he might. He determined on a visit to the
suburb of Turbaco, some eight miles from Cartagena, and once the site
of Don Ignacio's magnificent country home. Although he had been some
months in Cartagena, he had never before felt any desire to pass
beyond its walls. Now it seemed to him that he must break the
limitation which those encircling walls typified, that his restless
thought might expand ere it formulated into definite concepts and
plans for future work. This morning he wanted to be alone. The old
injury done to his sensitive spirit by the publication of his journal
had been unwittingly opened anew. The old slowness had crept again
into his gait since the evening before. Over night his countenance had
resumed its wonted heaviness; and his slender shoulders bent again
beneath their former burden.

When Jose arrived in Cartagena he had found it a city of vivid
contrasts. There mediaevalism still strove with the spirit of modern
progress; and so it suited well as an environment for the dilation of
his shrunken soul-arteries. The lethal influence of the monastery long
lay over him, beneath which he continued to manifest those eccentric
habits which his prolonged state of loneliness had engendered. He
looked askance at the amenities which his associates tentatively held
out to him. He sank himself deep in study, and for weeks, even months,
he shunned the world of people and things. He found no stimulus to a
search for his ancestral palace within the city, nor for a study of
the Rincon records which lay moldering in the ancient city's
archives.

But, as the sunlit days drifted dreamily past with peaceful, unvarying
monotony, Jose's faculties, which had always been alert until he had
been declared insane, gradually awakened. His violently disturbed
balance began to right itself; his equilibrium became in a measure
restored. The deadening thought that he had accomplished nothing in
his vitiated life yielded to a hopeful determination to yet retrieve
past failure. The pride and fear which had balked the thought of
self-destruction now served to fan the flame of fresh resolve. He
dared not do any writing, it was true. But he could delve and study.
And a thousand avenues opened to him through which he could serve his
fellow-men. The papal instructions which his traveling companion, the
Apostolic Delegate, had brought to the Bishop of Cartagena, evidently
had sufficed for his credentials; and the latter had made no occasion
to refer to the priest's past. An order from the Vatican was law; and
the Bishop obeyed it with no other thought than its inerrancy and
inexorability. And with the lapse of the several months which had
slipped rapidly away while he sought to forget and to clear from his
mind the dark clouds of melancholia which had settled over it, Jose
became convinced that the Bishop knew nothing of his career prior to
his arrival in Colombia.

And it is possible that the young priest's secret would have died with
him--that he would have lived out his life amid the peaceful scenes of
this old, romantic town, and gone to his long rest at last with the
consciousness of having accomplished his mite in the service of his
fellow-beings; it is possible that Rome would have forgotten him; and
that his uncle's ambitions, to which he knew that he had been regarded
as in some way useful, would have flagged and perished over the watery
waste which separated the New World from the Old, but for the
intervention of one man, who crossed Jose's path early in his new
life, found him inimical to his own worldly projects, and removed him,
therefore, as sincerely in the name of Christ as the ancient
_Conquistadores_, with priestly blessing, hewed from their paths of
conquest the simple and harmless aborigines.

That man was Wenceslas Ortiz, trusted servant of Holy Church,
who had established himself in Cartagena to keep a watchful eye on
anticlerical proceedings. That he was able to do this, and at the
same time turn them greatly to his own advantage, marks him as a man
of more than usually keen and resourceful mentality. He was a
native son, born of prosperous parents in the riverine town of
Mompox, which, until the erratic Magdalena sought for itself a new
channel, was the chief port between Barranquilla and the distant
Honda. There had been neither family custom nor parental hopes
to consider among the motives which had directed him into the
Church. He was a born worldling, but with unmistakable talents for
and keen appreciation of the art of politics. His love of money was
subordinate only to his love of power. To both, his talents made
access easy. In the contemplation of a career in his early years
he had hesitated long between the Church and the Army; but had
finally thrown his lot with the former, as offering not only
equal possibilities of worldly preferment and riches, but far
greater stability in those periodic revolutions to which his
country was so addicted. The Army was frequently overthrown; the
Church, never. The Government changed with every successful
political revolution; the Church remained immovable. And so with
the art of a trained politician he cultivated his chosen field with
such intensity that even the Holy See felt the glow of his ardor,
and in recognition of his marked abilities, his pious fervor and
great influence, was constrained to place him just where he wished
to be, at the right hand of the Bishop of Cartagena, and probable
successor to that aged incumbent, who had grown to lean heavily
and confidingly upon him.

As coadjutor, or suffragan to the Bishop of Cartagena, Wenceslas Ortiz
had at length gathered unto himself sufficient influence of divers
nature as, in his opinion, to ensure him the See in case the bishopric
should, as was contemplated, be raised eventually to the status of a
Metropolitan. It was he, rather than the Bishop, who distributed
parishes to ambitious pastors and emoluments to greedy politicians.
His irons in ecclesiastical, political, social and commercial fires
were innumerable. The doctrine of the indivisibility of Church and
State had in him an able champion--but only because he thereby found a
sure means of increasing his prestige and augmenting his power and
wealth. His methods of work manifested keenness, subtlety, shrewdness
and skill. His rewards were lavish. His punishments, terrible. The
latter smacked of the Inquisition: he preferred torture to quick
despatch.

It had not taken Wenceslas long to estimate the character of the
newcomer, Jose. Nor was he slow to perceive that this liberal pietist
was cast in an unusual mold. Polity necessitated the cultivation of
Jose, as it required the friendship--or, in any event, the thorough
appraisement--of every one with whom Wenceslas might be associated.
But the blandishments, artifice, diplomacy and hints of advancements
which he poured out in profusion upon Jose he early saw would fail
utterly to penetrate the armor of moral reserve with which the priest
was clad, or effect in the slightest degree the impression which they
were calculated to make.

In the course of time the priest became irritating; later, annoying;
and finally, positively dangerous to the ambitions of Wenceslas. For,
to illustrate, Jose had once discovered him, in the absence of the
Bishop, celebrating Mass in a state of inebriation. This irritated.
Wenceslas had only been careless. Again, Jose had several times shown
himself suspicious of his fast-and-loose methods with the rival
political factions of Cartagena. This was annoying. Finally, he had
come upon Jose in the market place a few weeks prior, in earnest
conference with Marcelena and the girl, Maria; and subsequent
conversation with him developed the fact that the priest had other
dark suspicions which were but too well founded. This was dangerous.
It was high time to prepare for possible contingencies.

And so, in due time, carefully wording his hint that Padre Jose de
Rincon might be a Radical spy in the ecclesiastical camp, Wenceslas
found means to obtain from Rome a fairly comprehensive account of
the priest's past history. He mused over this until an idea suddenly
occurred to him, namely, the similarity of this account with many of
the passages which he had found in a certain book, "The Confessions
of a Roman Catholic Priest"--a book which had cast the shadow of
distrust upon Wenceslas himself in relation to certain matters of
ecclesiastical politics in Colombia nearly three years before, and
at a most unfortunate time. Indeed, this sudden, unheralded
exposure had forced him to a hurried recasting of certain cherished
plans, and drawn from him a burning, unquenchable desire to lay his
pious hands upon the writer.

His influence with Rome at length revealed the secret of the wretched
book's authorship. And from the moment that he learned it, Jose's fate
was sealed. The crafty politician laughed aloud as he read the
priest's history. Then he drew his plans and waited. But in the
interim he made further investigations; and these he extended far back
into the ancestral history of this unfortunate scion of the once
powerful house of Rincon.

Meantime, a few carefully chosen words to the Bishop aroused a dull
interest in that quarter. Jose had been seen mingling freely with men
of very liberal political views. It would be well to warn him. Again,
weeks later, Wenceslas was certain, from inquiries made among the
students, that Jose's work in the classroom bordered a trifle too
closely on radicalism. It were well to admonish him. And, still later,
happening to call at Jose's quarters just above his own in the
ecclesiastical dormitory, and not finding him in, he had been struck
by the absence of crucifix or other religious symbol in the room. Was
the young priest becoming careless of his example?

And now, on this important feast-day, where was Padre Jose? On the
preceding evening, as Wenceslas leaned over the parapet of the wall
after his surprise by Jose, he had noted in the dim light the salient
features of a foreigner who, he had just learned, was registered at
the Hotel Mariano from the United States. Moreover, Wenceslas had just
come from Jose's room, whither he had gone in search of him, and--may
the Saints pardon his excess of holy zeal which impelled him to
examine the absent priest's effects!--he had returned now to the
Bishop bearing a copy of Renan's _Vie de Jesus_, with the American's
name on the flyleaf. It certainly were well to admonish Padre Jose
again, and severely!

The Bishop, hardly to the surprise of his crafty coadjutor, flew into
a towering rage. He was a man of irascible temper, bitterly
intolerant, and unreasoningly violent against all unbelievers,
especially Americans whose affairs brought them to Colombia. In this
respect he was the epitome of the ecclesiastical anti-foreign
sentiment which obtained in that country. His intolerance of heretics
was such that he would gladly have bound his own kin to the stake had
he believed their opinions unorthodox. Yet he was thoroughly
conscientious, a devout churchman, and saturated with the beliefs of
papal infallibility and the divine origin of the Church. In the
observance of church rites and ceremonies he was unremitting. In the
soul-burning desire to witness the conversion of the world, and
especially to see the lost children of Europe either coaxed or beaten
back into the embrace of Holy Church, his zeal amounted to fanaticism.
In the present case--

"Your Eminence," suggested the suave Wenceslas to his exasperated
superior, "may I propose that you defer action until I can discover
the exact status of this American?"

And the Bishop forthwith placed the whole matter in his trusted
assistant's helpful hands.

Meantime, Jose and the American explorer sat in the shade of a
magnificent palm on a high hill in beautiful Turbaco, looking out over
the shimmering sea beyond. For Hitt had wandered into the _Plaza de
Coches_ just as Jose was taking a carriage, and the latter could not
well refuse his proffered companionship for the day. Yet Jose feared
to be seen in broad daylight with this stranger, and he involuntarily
murmured a _Loado sea Dios_! when they reached Turbaco, as he
believed, unobserved. He did not know that a sharp-eyed young
novitiate, whom Wenceslas had detailed to keep the priest under
surveillance, had hurried back to his superior with the report of
Jose's departure with the _Americano_ on this innocent pleasure
jaunt.

"Say no more, my friend, in apology for your abrupt departure last
evening," the explorer urged. "But tell me, rather, about your
illustrious grandfather who had his country seat in this delightful
spot. Why, man! this is paradise. I've a notion to come here to live
some day."

Jose cast his apprehensions upon the soft ocean breeze, and gave
himself up to the inspiriting influence of his charming environment.
He dwelt at length upon the Rincon greatness of mediaeval days, and
expressed the resolve sometime to delve into the family records which
he knew must be hidden away in the moldering old city of Cartagena.
"But now," he concluded, after another reference to the Church, "is
Colombia to witness again the horror of those days of carnage? And
over the human mind's interpretation of the Christ? God forbid!"

The American shook his head dubiously. "There is but one
remedy--education. Not sectarian, partisan, worldly education--not
instruction in relative truths and the chaff of materialistic
speculation--but that sort of education whereby the selfish human mind
is lifted in a measure out of itself, out of its petty jealousies and
envyings, out of sneaking graft and touting for worldly emolument, and
into a sense of the eternal truth that real prosperity and soundness
of states and institutions are to be realized only when the
Christ-principle, 'Love thy neighbor as thyself,' is made the measure
of conduct. There is a tremendous truth which has long since been
demonstrated, and yet which the world is most woefully slow to grasp,
namely, that the surest, quickest means of realizing one's own
prosperity and happiness is in that of others--not in a world to come,
but right here and now."

"But that means the inauguration of the millennium," protested Jose.

"Well, and why not so?" returned the explorer calmly. "Has not that
been the ultimate aim of Christianity, and of all serious effort for
reform for the past two thousand years? And, do you know, the
millennium could be ushered in to-morrow, if men only thought so?
Within an incredibly short time evil, even to death itself, could be
completely wiped off the earth. But this wiping-off process must take
place in the minds and thoughts of men. Of that I am thoroughly
convinced. But, tell me, have you ever expressed to the Bishop your
views regarding the condition of this country?"

Jose flushed. "Yes," he replied in embarrassment. "Only a week ago I
tried again to convince him of the inevitable trend of events here
unless drastic measures were interposed by the Church. I had even
lectured on it in my classes."

"Well, what did he say?"

"The Bishop is a man of very narrow vision," replied Jose. "He rebuked
me severely and truculantly bade me confine my attention to the
particular work assigned me and let affairs of politics alone. Of
course, that meant leaving them to his assistant, Wenceslas. Mr. Hitt,
Colombia needs a Luther!"

"Just so," returned the explorer gravely. "Priestcraft from the very
earliest times has been one of the greatest curses of mankind. Its
abuses date far back to Egyptian times, when even prostitution was
countenanced by the priests, and when they practiced all sorts of
impostures upon the ignorant masses. In the Middle Ages they turned
Christianity, the richest of blessings, into a snare, a delusion, a
rank farce. They arrogated to themselves all learning, all science. In
Peru it was even illicit for any one not belonging to the nobility to
attempt to acquire learning. That was the sole privilege of priests
and kings. In all nations, from the remotest antiquity, and whether
civilized or not, learning has been claimed by the priests as the
unique privilege of their caste--a privilege bestowed upon them by the
special favor of the ruling deity. That's why they always sought to
surround their intellectual treasures with a veil of mystery. Roger
Bacon, the English monk, once said that it was necessary to keep the
discoveries of the philosophers from those unworthy of knowing them.
How did he expect a realization of 'Thy kingdom come,' I wonder?"

"They didn't expect it to come--on earth," said Jose.

"No. They relegated that to the imagined realm which was to be entered
through the gateway of death. It's mighty convenient to be able to
relegate your proofs to that mysterious realm beyond the grave. That
has always been a tremendous power in the hands of priests of all
times and lands. By the way, did you know that the story of Abel's
assassination was one of many handed down, in one form or another, by
the priests of India and Egypt?"

"Do you mean it?" inquired Jose eagerly.

"Certainly. The story doubtless comes from the ancient Egyptian tale
which the priests of that time used to relate regarding the murder
of Osiris by his brother, Set. It was a deed of jealousy. The story
later became incorporated into the sacred books of India and Egypt,
and was afterward taken over by the Hebrews, when they were captives
in Egypt. The Hebrews learned much of Egyptian theology, and their
own religion was greatly tinctured by it subsequently. The legend of
the deluge, for example, is another tradition of those primitive
days, and credited by the nations of antiquity. But here there is the
likelihood of a connection with the great cataclysm of antiquity,
the disappearance of the island of Atlantis in consequence of a
violent earthquake and volcanic action. This alleged island,
supposed to be a portion of the strip at one time connecting South
America with Africa, is thought to have sunk beneath the waters of
the present Atlantic ocean some nine thousand years before Solon
visited Egypt, and hence, some eleven thousand years ago. Anyway,
the story of this awful catastrophe got into the Egyptian records
in the earliest times, and was handed down to the Hebrews, who
probably based their story of the flood upon it. You see, there is a
foundation of some sort for all those legends in the book of Genesis.
The difficulty has been that humanity has for centuries childishly
accepted them as historical fact. For example, the serpent story.
Now in very primitive times the serpent was the special emblem of
Kneph, the creator of the world, and was regarded as a sort of
good genius. It is still so regarded by the Chinese, who make of it
one of their most beautiful symbols, the dragon. Later it became the
emblem of Set, the slayer of Osiris; and after that it was looked
upon with horror as the enemy of mankind, the destroyer, the evil
principle. Hence, in Egypt, the Hebrew captives adopted the serpent
as emblematical of evil, and later used it in their scriptural
records as the evil genius that tempted Eve and brought about the
fall of man. And so all people whose religious beliefs are founded
upon the Hebrew Bible now look upon the serpent as the symbol of
evil. Jews, Christians, and Mohammedans thus regard it."

Jose gazed at the man with rapt interest. "Don't stop!" he urged. "Go
on! go on!"

Hitt laughed. "Well," he resumed, "the tree and the serpent were
worshiped all through eastern countries, from Scandinavia to the
Asiatic peninsula and down into Egypt. And, do you know, we even find
vestiges of such worship in America? Down in Adams county, Ohio, on
the banks of Brush creek, there is a great mound, called the serpent
mound. It is seven hundred feet long, and greatly resembles the one in
Glen Feechan, Argyleshire, Scotland. It also resembles the one I found
in the ancient city of Tiahuanuco, whose ruins lie at an elevation of
some thirteen thousand feet above the Pacific ocean, on the shores of
Lake Titicaca, near the Bolivian frontier. This ancient city ages ago
sent out colonists all over North and South America. These primitive
people believed that a serpent emitted an egg from its mouth, and that
the earth was born of that egg. Now the serpent mound in Ohio has an
egg in its mouth. What is the logical inference?"

"You don't mean it!" exclaimed Jose, his eyes wide with astonishment.

Hitt laughed again in evident enjoyment of the priest's wonder. Then
he resumed: "It has been established to my entire satisfaction that
the ancient Egyptians and the Mayas of Central and South America used
almost identical symbols. And from all antiquity, and by all nations,
the symbols of the tree and serpent and their worship have been so
closely identified as to render it certain that their origin is the
same. What, then, are the serpent and tree of knowledge in the Hebrew
Bible but an outgrowth of this? The tree of life, of civilization, of
knowledge, was placed in the middle of the land, of the 'garden,' of
the primitive country of the race, Mayax. And the empire of the Mayas
was situated between the two great continents of North and South
America. These people spread out in all directions. They populated the
then existing island of Atlantis. And when the terrible earthquake
occurred, whereby this island was sunk beneath the waves of the
Atlantic ocean, why, to these people the world had been drowned! The
story got to Egypt, to Chaldea, and to India. Hence the deluge record
of Genesis."

"But, these primitive people, how ancient are they?" queried Jose.

"No one can form any adequate estimate," said Hitt in reply. "The
wonderful city of Tiahuanuco was in ruins when Manco Capac laid the
foundations of the Inca empire, which was later devastated by the
Spaniards. And the Indians told the Spaniards that it had been
constructed by giants before the sun shone in heaven."

"Astonishing!" exclaimed Jose. "Such facts as these--if facts they
be--relegate much of the Scriptural authority to the realm of legend
and myth!"

"Quite so," returned the explorer. "When the human mind of this
century forces itself to approach a subject without prejudice or bias,
and without the desire to erect or maintain a purely human institution
at whatever cost to world-progress, then it finds that much of the
hampering, fettering dogma of mediaevalism now laid upon it by the
Church becomes pure fiction, without justifiable warrant or basis.
Remember, the Hebrew people gave us the Old Testament, in which they
had recorded for ages their tribal and national history, their poetry,
their beliefs and hopes, as well as their legends, gathered from all
sources. We have likewise the historical records of other nations. But
the Hebrew possessed one characteristic which differentiated him from
all other people. He was a monotheist, and he saw his God in every
thing, every event, every place. His concept of God was his
life-motif. This concept evolved slowly, painfully, throughout the
centuries. The ancient Hebrew patriarchs saw it as a variable God,
changeful, fickle, now violently angry, now humbly repentant, now
making contracts with mankind, now petulantly destroying His own
handiwork. He was a God who could order the slaughter of innocent
babes, as in the book of Samuel; or He was a tender, merciful Father,
as in the Psalms. He could harden hearts, wage bloody wars, walk with
men 'in the cool of the day,' create a universe with His fist, or
spend long days designing and devising the material utensils and
furniture of sacrifice to be used in His own worship. In short, men
saw in Him just what they saw in themselves. They saw but their mental
concept. The Bible records humanity's changing, evolving concept of
God, of that 'something not ourselves which makes for righteousness.'
And this concept gradually changed from the magnified God-man of the
Old Testament, a creature of human whims and passions, down to that
held by the man of Nazareth, a new and beautiful concept of God as
love. This new concept Jesus joyously gave to a sin-weary world that
had utterly missed the mark. But it cost him his earthly life to do
it. And the dark record of the so-called Christian Church, both
Protestant and Catholic, contains the name of many a one who has paid
the same penalty for a similar service of love.

"The Chaldeans and Egyptians," he went on, after a moment's reflective
pause, "gave the Hebrews their account of the creation of the
universe, the fall of man, the flood, and many other bits of mythical
lore. And into these stories the Hebrews read the activity of their
God, and drew from them deep moral lessons. Egypt gave the Hebrews at
least a part of the story of Joseph, as embodied in the hieroglyphics
which may be read on the banks of the Nile to-day. They probably also
gave the Hebrews the account of the creation found in the second
chapter of Genesis, for to this day you can see in some of the oldest
Egyptian temples pictures of the gods making men out of lumps of clay.
The discovery of the remains of the 'Neanderthal man' and the 'Ape-man
of Java' now places the dawn of human reason at a period some three to
five hundred thousand years prior to our present century, and,
combined with the development of the science of geology, which shows
that the total age of the earth's stratified rocks alone cannot be
much less than fifty-five millions of years, serves to cast additional
ridicule upon the Church's present attitude of stubborn adherence to
these prehistoric scriptural legends as literal, God-given fact. But,
to make the right use of these legends--well, that is another thing."

"And that?"

The explorer hesitated. "I find it difficult to explain," he said at
length. "But, remember what I have already said, there is, there
_must_ be, a foundation beneath all these legends which admonish
mankind to turn from evil to good. And, as I also said, that
foundation must be very broad. I have said that I was in search of a
religion. Why not, you may ask, accept the religious standard which
Jesus set? That was the new concept of God as love. Very good. I am
quite convinced that love is _the_ religion, _the_ tie which binds all
things together and to a common source and cause. And I am equally
convinced that Jesus is the only person recorded in history who ever
lived a life of pure reflection of the love which he called God. And
so you see why I am chipping and hewing away at the theological
conception of the Christ, and trying to get at the reality buried deep
beneath in the theological misconceptions of the centuries. I am quite
convinced that if men loved one another, as Jesus bade them do, all
war, strife, disease, poverty, and discord of every sort would vanish
from human experience. But--and here is a serious question--did Jesus
ask the impossible? Did he command us to love the sinful, erring
mortal whom we see in our daily walk--or did he--did he have a new
thought, namely, that by loving the real man, for which, perhaps, this
human concept stands in the human mind, _that this very act would
change that distorted concept and cause it to yield its place to the
real one_? I believe Jesus to have been the wisest man who ever trod
this earth. But I likewise believe that no man has ever been more
deplorably misunderstood, misquoted, and misinterpreted than he. And
so I am delving down, down beneath the mass of human conjecture and
ridiculous hypothesis which the Church Fathers and our own theologians
have heaped up over this unique character, if perchance I may some day
discover just what he was, just what he really said, and just what the
message which he sought to convey to mankind."

He leaned over and laid a hand on Jose's arm. "My young friend," he
said earnestly, "I believe there are meanings in the life and words of
Jesus of which the Church in its astounding self-sufficiency has never
even dreamed. Did he walk on the water? Did he feed the multitude with
a few loaves? Did he raise Lazarus? Did he himself issue from the
tomb? No more momentous questions were ever asked than these. For, if
so, _then the message of Jesus has a bearing on the material universe,
on the human mind, and the whole realm of thought that is utterly
revolutionary_! What was that message? Did the man's own apostles and
immediate followers understand it? Did Paul? Certain we are, however,
that the theology which Rome gave to her barbarian conquerors was
wholly different from that taught by Jesus and his disciples. And we
know that the history of Europe from the fall of the Roman Empire down
to the Franco-Prussian war is largely a recital of the development of
the religious beliefs which Rome handed down to her conquerors, and
their influence upon the human mind. These beliefs constitute the
working hypothesis of that institution known to-day as the Holy Roman
Catholic Church, and its separated offshoots, the Greek Catholic and
the Protestant Churches, including the numberless ramifications and
divisions of the latter. The question as to whether eternal salvation
is a function of complete immersion of the human body, or only a
gentle sprinkling, appears most lamentably puerile in the face of the
tremendous revolutionary truths hinted by the deeds of Jesus, assuming
that he has been correctly reported in the Gospels. No; Renan, in his
_Vie de Jesus_, which I gave you last night, missed it. Before him,
Voltaire and countless other critics of man-made theology missed it.
The writings of these men do serve, however, to mow down the
theological stubble in the world's field of thought. What is it, this
gigantic truth which Jesus brought? I do not know. But he himself is
reported to have said, 'If ye keep my commands, ye shall know of the
doctrine.' And his chief command was, _that we love God and our
fellow-men_. I have no doubt whatever that, when we follow this
command, we shall know of the doctrine which he came to establish in
the hearts of men."

"But his message was the brotherhood of man," said Jose.

"Nay," replied the explorer, "it was the _fatherhood_ of God,
rather. For that includes the brotherhood of man. But, while we agree
thus far, who can say what the fatherhood of God implies? Who,
realizing that this was Jesus' message, knows how to make it
practical, as he did? To him it meant--ah, what did it not mean! It
meant a consciousness that held _not one trace of evil_. It meant a
consciousness of God as omnipotent power, the irresistible power
of good, which, in the form of spirit, or mind, as some will have it,
is ever present. Is it not so? Well, then, who is there to-day,
within the Church or without, who understands the divine message of
the fatherhood of God sufficiently to acquire such a consciousness,
and to make the intensely practical application of the message to
every problem of mind, or body, or environment? Who to-day in your
Church or mine, for example, realizes that Jesus must have seen
something in matter far different from the solid, indestructible thing
that we think we see, and that this was due to his understanding of
the immanence of his Father as spirit--an understanding which enabled
him to walk on the waves, and to treat material things as if they
were not? No, my friend, the Christ-message of the fatherhood of God
is hardly apprehended in the world to-day in the slightest degree by
priest or prelate, church or sect. And yet, the influence of Jesus is
tremendous!"

Jose's brow knit in perplexity. "I--I don't believe I follow you,
quite," he said.

"I am not surprised," replied the explorer gently. "I sometimes wonder
if I understand myself just what it is that I am trying to express. My
belief is still in a state of transition. I am still searching. The
field has been cleared. And now--now I am waiting for the new seed. I
have abandoned forever the sterile, non-productive religious beliefs
of current theology. I have abandoned such belittling views of God as
the Presbyterian sublapsarian view of election. I have turned wearily
from the puerile dogma of your Church as unworthy of the Father of
Jesus. From delving into the mysteries of the Brahminism of India, of
ancestor-worship in Japan, of Confucianism in China, of Islamism in
the far East, I have come back to the wonderful man of Nazareth. And
now I am trying to see what Christianity would be if purged of its
adulterations--purged of the Greek philosophy of the early Fathers; of
the forgeries of the Middle Ages; of the pagan ceremonialism and
priestly rites and assumptions of power to save or damn in this
present century. And what do I find, after all this rubbish has been
filtered out? Love, friend--love; the unfathomable love of the Father
of Jesus, who knows no evil, no sin, no sickness, no death, no hell,
no material heaven, but whose kingdom is the harmonious realm of
spirit, or mind, wherein the individual consciousness knows no discord
of any name or nature."

The afternoon haze had been long gathering when Jose roused the sleeping
_cochero_ and prepared to return to the stifling ecclesiastical
atmosphere from which for a brief day he had been so happily free. A
cold chill swept over him when he took his seat in the carriage, and
he shuddered as if with an evil presentiment.

"And you still adhere to your determination to remain in the Church?"
his friend asked, as they turned from the green hills and nodding
palms of Turbaco, and set their course, toward the distant mediaeval
city.

"Yes," came the scarcely audible reply. But as Jose spoke, he knew
that his mind had that day been stripped of its last remaining vestige
of the old theology, leaving it bare, exposed--and receptive.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A week passed. The explorer had gone, as silently and unannounced as
he had come. The evening before his departure he and Jose had sat
again in the thick shadows of the old wall. The next morning he was on
the mighty river; and the priest was left with a great void in his
heart.

One noon, as Jose was returning from his classes, he pondered deeply
the last words of the explorer, "Remember, nothing that has been
invented by mankind or evolved by the human mind can stand, or remain.
We might just as well accept that great fact now as later, and adjust
ourselves to it. But the things of the spirit remain. And Paul has
told us what they are."

As he passed slowly along the winding little street toward the
dormitory, a messenger approached him with a summons from the Bishop.
He turned and started wonderingly toward the Cathedral. He had been
reprimanded once, twice, for the liberal views which he had expressed
to his classes. Was he to receive another rebuke now? He had tried to
be more careful of late. Had he been seen with the explorer?

An hour later, his eyes set and unseeing, and his thin lips trembling,
Jose dragged himself up the stone steps to his little room and threw
himself upon the bed. The bonds which had been slowly, imperceptibly
tightening during these few months of precious liberty had been drawn
suddenly taut. The Bishop, in the _role_ of _Inquisitor Natus_, had
just revealed a full knowledge of his dismal past, and had summarily
dismissed him from the University faculty. Jose, bewildered and
stunned, had tried vainly to defend himself. Then, realizing his
impotence before the uncompromising bigotry of this choleric
ecclesiastic, he had burst suddenly into a torrent of frenzied
declarations of his undeserved wrongs, of his resolve now to renounce
his oath, to leave the Church, to abandon honor, family, everything
that held or claimed him, and to flee into unknown and unknowing
parts, where his harassed soul might find a few years of rest before
its final flight! The Bishop became bitterly and implacably
infuriated, and remanded the excited priest to his room to reflect
upon his wild words, and to await the final disposition of his
case--unless he should have determined already to try the devious
route of apostasy.

Rising the next morning at dawn from the chill floor where he had
spent the torturing hours of an interminable night, and still clinging
forlornly to his battered sense of honor and family pride, Jose again
received the Bishop's summons; and, after the events of the morning
already related, faced the angry churchman's furious tirade, and with
it, what he could not have imagined before, a charge of hideous
immorality. Then had been set before him a choice between apostasy and
acceptance of the assignment to the parish of far-off Simiti.

"And now, unpitying Fate," he murmured, as the door of the Bishop's
_sanctum_ closed behind him, and he wandered down through the gloom of
the quiet Cathedral, "receive your victim. You have chosen well your
carnal instruments--pride--ecclesiasticism--lust! My crimes? Aye, the
very lowest; for I have loved liberty of thought and conscience; I
have loved virtue and honor; the pursuits of intellect; the fair; the
noble; yea, the better things of life. I have loved my fellow-men; and
I have sought their emancipation from the thraldom of ignorance. I
have loved truth, and the Christ who revealed it to the dull minds of
mortals. Enough! I stand convicted! And--I accept the sentence--I have
no desire to resist it. For the end is now not distant!"




CHAPTER 16


The tropical moon shone in her fullness from an unclouded sky. Through
the ethereal atmosphere which bathed the storied city her beams fell,
plashing noiselessly upon the grim memorials of a stirring past. With
a mantle of peace they gently covered the former scenes of violence
and strife. With magic, intangible substance they filled out the rents
in the grassy walls and smoothed away the scars of battle. The pale
luster, streaming through narrow barbican and mildewed arch, touched
the decaying ruin of San Felipe with the wand of enchantment, and
restored it to pristine freshness and strength. Through the stillness
of night the watery vapor streamed upward from garden and _patio_, and
mingled with the scent of flushing roses and tropical buds in a
fragrant mist suffused with the moon's yellow glow.

On the low parapet bordering the eastern esplanade of the city wall
the solitary figure of the priest cast a narrow shadow in the pale
moonlight. The sounds which eddied the enveloping silence seemed to
echo in his ears the tread of mediaeval warriors. In the wraith-like
shadows he saw the armored forms of _Conquistadores_ in mortal strife
with vulpine buccaneers. In the whirring of the bats which flouted his
face he heard the singing of arrows and the hiss of hurled rocks. In
the moan of the ocean as it broke on the coral reef below sounded the
boom of cannon, the curses of combatants, and the groans of the dying.
Here and there moved tonsured monks, now absolving in the name of the
peaceful Christ the frenzied defenders of the Heroic City, now turning
to hurl curses at the swarming enemy and consign their blackened souls
to deepest hell, while holding images of the crucified Saviour to the
quivering lips of stricken warriors.

In the fancied combat raging in the moonlight before him he saw the
sons of the house of Rincon manifesting their devotion to Sovereign
and Pope, their unshaken faith in Holy Church, their hot zeal which
made them her valiant defenders, her support, her humble and devoted
slaves for more than three centuries.

What was the charm by which she had held them? And why had its potency
failed utterly when directed to him? But they were men of physical
action, not thought--men of deeds which called only for brave hearts
and stout bodies. It is true, there had been thinkers in those days,
when the valiant sons of Rincon hurled the enemy from Cartagena's
walls--but they lay rotting in dungeons--they lay broken on the rack,
or hung breathing out their souls to God amid the hot flames which His
self-appointed vicars kindled about them. The Rincons of that day had
not been thinkers. But the centuries had finally evolved from their
number a man of thought. Alas! the evolution had developed intellect,
it is true--but the process had refined away the rugged qualities of
animal strength which, without a deeper hold on Truth and the way to
demonstrate it than Jose possessed, must leave him the plaything of
Fate.

Young in years, but old in sorrow; held by oaths which his ever-accusing
sense of honor would not let him break; trembling for his mother's
sake, and for the sake of Rincon pride, lest the ban of excommunication
fall upon him; yet little dreaming that Rome had no thought of this
while his own peculiar elements of character bound him as they did
to her; the man had at last yielded his life to the system which had
wrecked it in the name of Christ, and was now awaiting the morrow, when
the boat should bear him to far-off Simiti. He went resignedly--even
with a dull sense of gladness--for he went to die. Life had yielded
him nothing--and constituted as he was, it could hold nothing for him
in the future.

The glorious moon poured its full splendor upon the quiet city.
Through the haze the convent on La Popa sparkled like an enchanted
castle, with a pavement of soft moonbeams leading up to its doors. The
trill of a distant nightingale rippled the scented air; and from the
_llanos_ were borne on the warm land breeze low feral sounds, broken
now and then by the plaintive piping of a lonely toucan. The cocoa
palms throughout the city stirred dreamily in the tempered moonlight;
and the banana trees, bending with their luscious burden, cast great,
mysterious shadows, wherein insect life rustled and scampered in
nocturnal activity.

"Padre Jose!"

A woman's voice called from below. The priest leaned over the wall.

"It is Catalina. I have been hunting everywhere. Maria is calling for
you. She cannot live long. You will come?"

Come? Yes--ah, why did he let his own misery blind him to the sorrow
of others even more unfortunate! Why had he forgotten the little
Maria! Descending the broad incline to the road below, Jose hurried
with the woman to the bedside of the dying girl. On the way the
warm-hearted, garrulous Catalina relieved her troubled and angered
soul.

"Padre Lorenzo came this morning. He would not shrive her unless we
would pay him first. He said he would do it for ten _pesos_--then
five--and then three. And when we kept telling him that we had no
money he told us to go out and borrow it, or he would leave the little
Maria to die as she was. He said she was a vile sinner anyway--that
she had not made her Easter duty--that she could not have the
Sacrament--and her soul would go straight to hell--and there was no
redemption! Then he came again this afternoon and said she must die;
but he would shrive her for two _pesos_. And when we told him we could
not borrow the money he was terribly angry, and cursed--and Marcelena
was frightened--and the little Maria almost died. But I told him to
go--that her little soul was whiter than his--and if he went to heaven
I didn't want Maria to go there too--and--!"

The woman's words burned through the priest's ears and into his
sickened soul. Recovering her breath, Catalina went on:

"It is only a few days ago that the little Maria meets Sister Isabel
in the _plaza_. 'Ah,' says Sister Isabel, 'you are going to be a
mother.'

"'Yes, Sister,' answers the little Maria, much confused; and she tries
to hide behind Marcelena.

"'It is very dangerous and you will suffer much unless you have a
sacred cord of Saint Frances,' says the Sister. 'I will bring you
one.'

"And then she asks where the little Maria lives; and that very day she
brings a piece of rope, with knots in it, which she says the priest
has blessed, and it is a sacred cord of Saint Frances, and if the
little Maria will wear it around her waist she will not suffer at the
parturition; and the little Maria must pay a _peso oro_ for it--and
the scared little lamb paid it, for she had saved a little money which
Don Carlos Ojeda gave her for washing--and she wore it when the babe
was born; but it didn't help her--"

"_Dios!_" ejaculated the priest.

"And Marcelena had paid a _peso y medio_," continued the excited
woman, "for a candle that Sister Natalia told her had come from the
altar of the Virgin of Santander and was very holy and would help one
through confinement. But the candle went out; and it was only a round
stick of wood with a little piece of candle on the end. And I--Padre,
I could not help it, I would do anything for the poor child--I paid
two _pesos oro_ for a new _escapulario_ for her. Sister Natalia said
it was very holy--it had been blessed by His Grace, the Bishop, just
for women who were to be mothers, and it would carry them through--but
if they died, it would take them right out of purgatory--and--!"

"Catalina!" interrupted the tortured priest. "Say no more!"

"But, Padre, the babe," the woman persisted. "What will become of it?
And--do you know?--Padre Lorenzo says _it is yours!_ He told Juanita
so--she lives below us. But Maria says no. She has told only
Marcelena--and Marcelena will never tell. Who is its father, Padre?"

The priest, recognizing the inevitable, patiently resigned himself to
the woman's talk without further reply. Presently they turned into the
Calle Lazano, and entering the house where Marcelena had greeted him
that morning, mounted to the chamber above where lay the little
Maria.

A single candle on a table near the head of the bed shed a flickering,
uncertain light. But the window was open, and the moon's beams poured
into the room in golden profusion. Aside from the girl, there were no
other occupants than Marcelena and the new-born child.

"Padre," murmured the passing girl, "you will not let me die without
the Sacrament?"

"No, child," replied the priest, bending over her, hot tears streaming
down his cheeks as she kissed his hand.

The girl had been beautiful, a type of that soft, southern beauty,
whose graces of form, full, regular features, and rich olive tint mark
them as truly Spanish, with but little admixture of inferior blood.
Her features were drawn and set now; but her great, brown eyes which
she raised to the priest were luminous with a wistful eagerness that
in this final hour became sacred.

"Marcelena," the priest hurriedly whispered to the woman. "I have
no--but it matters not now; she need not know that I come unprepared.
She must pass out of the world happy at last."

"There is a drop of wine that the doctor left; and I will fetch a bit
of bread," replied the woman, catching the meaning of the priest's
words.

"Bring it; and I will let her confess now."

Bending over the sinking girl, the priest bade her reveal the burden
resting on her conscience.

"_Carita_," he said tenderly, when the confession was ended, "fear
not. The blessed Saviour died for you. He went to prepare a place for
you and for us all. He forgave the sinful woman--_carita_, he forgives
you--yes, freely, gladly. He loves you, little one. Fear not what
Padre Lorenzo said. He is a sinful priest. Forget all now but the good
Saviour, who stands with open arms--with a smile on his beautiful
face--to welcome his dear child--his little girl--you, _carita_,
you."

"Padre--my babe?"

"Yes, child, it shall be cared for."

"But not by the Sisters"--excitedly--"not in an asylum--Padre, promise
me!"

"There, _carita_, it shall be as you wish."

"And you will care for it?"

"I, child?--ah, yes, I will care for it."

The girl sank back again with a smile of happiness. A deep silence
fell upon the room. At the feet of the priest Catalina huddled and
wept softly. Marcelena, in the shadow of the bed where she might not
be seen, rocked silently back and forth with breaking heart.

"Padre--you will--say Masses for me?" The words were scarcely
audible.

"Yes, _carita_."

"I--have no money--no money. He promised to give me--money--and
clothes--"

"There, _carita_, I will say Masses for you without money--every day,
for a year. And you shall have clothes--ah, carita, in heaven you
shall have everything."

The candle sputtered, and went out. The moon flooded the room with
ethereal radiance.

"Padre--lift me up--it grows dark--oh, Padre, you are so good to
me--so good."

"No, child, it is not I who am good to you, but the blessed Christ.
See him, _carita_--there--there in the moonlight he stands!"

The smoke from a neighboring chimney drifted slowly past the window
and shone white in the silvery beams. The girl, supported by the arm
of the priest, gazed at it through dimming eyes in reverent awe.

"Padre," she whispered, "it is the Saviour! Pray to him for me."

"Yes, child." And turning toward the window the priest extended his
hand.

"Blessed Saviour," he prayed, "this is one of thy stricken lambs,
lured by the wolf from the fold. And we have brought her back. Dost
thou bid her come?"

The sobs of the weeping woman at his feet floated through the room.

"Ah, thou tender and pitying Master--best friend of the sinning, the
sick, and the sorrowing--we offer to thee this bruised child. We find
no sin, no guile, in her; for after the ignorant code of men she has
paid the last farthing for satisfying the wolf's greed. Dost thou bid
her come?"

In the presence of death he felt his own terrible impotence. Of what
avail then was his Christianity? Or the Church's traditional words of
comfort? The priest's tears fell fast. But something within--perhaps
that "something not ourselves"--the voice of Israel's almost forgotten
God--whispered a hope that blossomed in this petition of tenderest
love and pity. He had long since ceased to pray for himself; but in
this, the only prayer that had welled from his chilled heart in
months, his pitying desire to humor the wishes of a dying girl had
unconsciously formulated his own soul's appeal.

"Blessed Saviour, take her to thine arms; shield her forever more
from the carnal lust of the wolf; lift her above the deadening
superstitions and hypocritical creeds of those who touch but to
stain; take her, Saviour, for we find her pure, innocent, clean;
suffering and sorrow have purged away the sin. Dost thou bid her
come?"

The scent of roses and orange blossoms from the garden below drifted
into the room on the warm breeze. A bird, awakened by the swaying of
its nest, peeped a few sweet notes of contentment, and slept again.

"We would save her--we would cure her--but we, too, have strayed from
thee and forgotten thy commands--and the precious gift of healing
which thou didst leave with men has long been lost. But thou art
here--thy compassionate touch still heals and saves. Jesus, unique son
of God, behold thy child. Wilt thou bid her come?"

"What says he, Padre?" murmured the sinking girl.

The priest bent close to her.

"He says come, _carita_--come!"

With a fluttering sigh the tired child sank back into the priest's
arms and dropped softly into her long sleep.




CHAPTER 17


The twisted, turbid "Danube of New Granada," under the gentle guidance
of its patron, Saint Mary Magdalene, threads the greater part of its
sinuous way through the heart of Colombia like an immense, slow-moving
morass. Born of the arduous tropic sun and chill snows, and imbued by
the river god with the nomadic instinct, it leaps from its pinnacled
cradle and rushes, sparkling with youthful vigor, down precipice and
perpendicular cliff; down rocky steeps and jagged ridges; whirling in
merry, momentary dance in shaded basins; singing in swirling eddies;
roaring in boisterous cataracts, to its mad plunge over the lofty wall
of Tequendama, whence it subsides into the dignity of broad maturity,
and begins its long, wandering, adult life, which slowly draws to a
sluggish old age and final oblivion in the infinite sea. Toward the
close of its meandering course, long after the follies and excesses of
early life, it takes unto itself a consort, the beautiful Cauca; and
together they flow, broadening and deepening as life nears its end;
merging their destinies; sharing their burdens; until at last, with
labors ended, they sink their identities in the sunlit Caribbean.

When the simple-minded _Conquistadores_ first pushed their frail
cockleshells out into the gigantic embouchure of this tawny stream and
looked vainly for the opposite shore, veiled by the dewy mists of a
glittering morn, they unconsciously crossed themselves and, forgetful
for the moment of greed and rapine and the lust of gold, stood in
reverent awe before the handiwork of their Creator. Ere the Spaniard
had laid his fell curse upon this ancient kingdom of the Chibchas, the
flowering banks of the Magdalena, to-day so mournfully characterized
by their frightful solitudes, were an almost unbroken village from the
present coast city of Barranquilla to Honda, the limit of navigation,
some nine hundred miles to the south. The cupidity of the heartless,
bigoted rabble from mediaeval slums which poured into this wonderland
late in the sixteenth century laid waste this luxuriant vale and
exterminated its trustful inhabitants. Now the warm airs that sigh at
night along the great river's uncultivated borders seem still to echo
the gentle laments of the once happy dwellers in this primitive
paradise.

Sitting in the rounded bow of the wretched riverine steamer Honda,
Padre Jose de Rincon gazed with vacant eyes upon the scenery on either
hand. The boat had arrived from Barranquilla that morning, and was now
experiencing the usual exasperating delay in embarking from Calamar.
He had just returned to it, after wandering for hours through the
forlorn little town, tormented physically by the myriad mosquitoes,
and mentally by a surprising eagerness to reach his destination. He
could account for the latter only on the ground of complete
resignation--a feeling experienced by those unfortunate souls who have
lost their way in life, and, after vain resistance to molding
circumstances, after the thwarting of ambitions, the quenching of
ideals, admit defeat, and await, with something of feverish
anticipation, the end. He had left Cartagena early that morning on the
ramshackle little train which, after hours of jolting over an
undulating roadbed, set him down in Calamar, exhausted with the heat
and dust-begrimed. He had not seen the Bishop nor Wenceslas since the
interview of the preceding day. Before his departure, however, he had
made provision for the burial of the girl, Maria, and the disposal of
her child. This he did at his own expense; and when the demands of
doctor and sexton had been met, and he had provided Marcelena with
funds for the care of herself and the child for at least a few weeks,
his purse was pitiably light.

Late in the afternoon the straggling remnant of a sea breeze drifted
up the river and tempered the scorching heat. Then the captain of the
Honda drained his last glass of red rum in the _posada_, reiterated to
his political affiliates with spiritous bombast his condensed opinion
anent the Government, and dramatically signaled the pilot to get under
way.

Beyond the fact that Simiti lay somewhere behind the liana-veiled
banks of the great river, perhaps three hundred miles from Cartagena,
the priest knew nothing of his destination. There were no passengers
bound for the place, the captain had told him; nor had the captain
himself ever been there, although he knew that one must leave the boat
at a point called Badillo, and thence go by canoe to the town in
question.

But Jose's interest in Simiti was only such as one might manifest in a
prison to which he was being conveyed. And, as a prisoner of the
Church, he inwardly prayed that his remaining days might be few. The
blows which had fallen, one after another, upon his keen, raw nerves
had left him benumbed. The cruel bruises which his faith in man had
received in Rome and Cartagena had left him listless, and without
pain. He was accepting the Bishop's final judgment mutely, for he had
already borne all that human nature could endure. His severance from a
life of faith and love was complete.

Nor could Jose learn when he might hope to reach Badillo, though he
made listless inquiry.

"_Na, Senor Padre_," the captain had said, "we never know where to
find the water. It is on the right to-day; on the left to-morrow.
There is low tide to-night; the morning may see it ten feet higher.
And Badillo--_quien sabe_? It might be washed away when we arrive."
And he shrugged his shoulders in complete disclaimer of any
responsibility therefor.

The captain's words were not idle, for the channel of the mighty river
changes with the caprice of a maiden's heart. With irresistible
momentum the tawny flood rolls over the continent, now impatiently
ploughing its way across a great bend, destroying plantations and
abruptly leaving towns and villages many miles inland; now savagely
filching away the soft loam banks beneath little settlements and
greedily adding broad acres to the burden of its surcharged waters.
Mighty giants of the forest, wrested from their footholds of
centuries, plunge with terrifying noise into the relentless stream;
great masses of earth, still cohering, break from their moorings and
glide into the whirling waters, where, like immense islands, they
journey bobbing and tumbling toward the distant sea.

Against the strong current, whose quartzose sediment tinkled
metallically about her iron prow, the clumsy Honda made slow headway.
She was a craft of some two hundred tons burden, with iron hull,
stern paddle wheel, and corrugated metal passenger deck and roof.
Below the passenger deck, and well forward on the hull, stood the
huge, wood-burning boiler, whose incandescent stack pierced the open
space where the gasping travelers were forced to congregate to get
what air they might. Midway on this deck she carried a few cabins at
either side. These, bare of furnishings, might accommodate a dozen
passengers, if the insufferable heat would permit them to be
occupied. Each traveler was obliged to supply his own bedding, and
likewise hammock, unless not too discriminating to use the soiled
cot provided. Many of those whose affairs necessitated river
travel--and there was no other mode of reaching the interior--were
content at night to wrap a light blanket about them and lie down
under their mosquito nets on the straw mats--_petates_--with which
every _peon_ goes provided. Of service, there was none that might be
so designated. A few dirty, half-dressed <DW64> boys from the streets
of Barranquilla performed the functions of steward, waiting on table
with unwashed hands, helping to sling hammocks, or assisting with the
carving of the freshly killed beef on the slippery deck below.
Accustomed as he had been to the comforts of Rome, and to the less
elaborate though still adequate accommodations which Cartagena
afforded, Jose viewed his prison boat with sinking heart. Iron hull,
and above it the glowing boiler; over this the metal passenger deck;
and above that the iron roof, upon which the fierce tropical sun
poured its flaming heat all day; clouds of steam and vapor from
the hot river enveloping the boat--had the Holy Inquisition itself
sought to devise the most refined torture for a man of delicate
sensibilities like Jose de Rincon, it could not have done better than
send him up the great river at this season and on that miserable
craft, in company with his own morbid and soul-corroding thoughts.

The day wore on; and late in the evening the Honda docked at the
pretentious town of Maganguey, the point of transfer for the river
Cauca. Like the other passengers, from whom he had held himself
reservedly aloof, Jose gladly seized the opportunity to divert his
thoughts for a few moments by going ashore. But the moments stretched
into hours; and when he finally learned that the boat would not leave
until daybreak, he lapsed into a state of sullen desperation which,
but for the Rincon stubbornness, would have precipitated him into the
dark stream. Aimlessly he wandered about the town, avoiding any
possible _rencontre_ with priests, or with his fellow-passengers, many
of whom, together with the bacchanalian captain, he saw in the various
_cantinas_, making merry over rum and the native _anisado_.

The moon rose late, bathing the whitewashed town in a soft sheen and
covering with its yellow veil the filth and squalor which met the
priest at every turn as he wandered through its ill-lighted streets.
Maganguey in plan did not depart from the time-honored custom of the
Spaniards, who erected their cities by first locating the church, and
then building the town around it. So long as the church had a good
location, the rest of the town might shift for itself. Some of the
better buildings dated from the old colonial period, and had tile
roofs and red brick floors. Many bore scars received in the
internecine warfare which has raged in the unhappy country with but
brief intervals of peace since the days of Spanish occupation. But
most of the houses were of the typical mud-plastered, palm-thatched
variety, with dirt floors and scant furniture. Yet even in many of
these Jose noted pianos and sewing machines, generally of German make,
at which the housewife was occupied, while naked babes and squealing
pigs--the latter of scarcely less value than the former--fought for
places of preferment on the damp and grimy floors.

Wandering, blindly absorbed in thought, into a deserted road which
branched off from one of the narrow streets on the outskirts of the
town, Jose stumbled upon a figure crouching in the moonlight. Almost
before he realized that it was a human being a hand had reached up and
caught his.

"_Buen Padre!_" came a thick voice from the mass, "for the love of the
good Virgin, a few _pesos_!"

A beggar--perhaps a bandit! Ah, well; Jose's purse was light--and his
life of no value. So, recovering from his start, he sought in his
pockets for some _billetes_. But--yes, he remembered that after
purchasing his river transportation in Calamar he had carefully put
his few remaining bills in his trunk.

"_Amigo_, I am sorry, but I have no money with me," he said
regretfully. "But if you will come to the boat I will gladly give you
something there."

At this the figure emitted a scream of rage, and broke into a torrent
of sulphurous oaths. "_Na_, the Saints curse you beggarly priests! You
have no money, but you rob us poor devils with your lies, and then
leave us to rot to death!"

"But, _amigo_, did I not say--" began Jose soothingly.

"_Maldito!_" shrilled the figure; "may Joseph and Mary and Jesus curse
you! A million curses on you, _maldito_!" Pulling itself upward, the
shapeless thing sank its teeth deep into the priest's hand.

With a cry of pain the startled Jose tore himself loose, his hand
dripping with blood. At the same time the figure fell over into the
road and its enveloping rags slipped off, disclosing in the bright
moonlight a loathsome, distorted face and elephantine limbs, covered
with festering sores.

"Good God!" cried Jose, recoiling. "A leper!"

Turning swiftly from the hideous object, his brain awhirl with the
horrible nightmare, the priest fled blindly from the scene. Nauseated,
quivering with horror, with the obscene ravings of the leper still
ringing in his ears, he stumbled about the town until daybreak, when
the boat's shrieking whistle summoned him to embark.

The second day on the river seemed to Jose intolerable, as he shifted
about the creaking, straining tub to avoid the sun's piercing rays and
the heat which, drifting back from the hot stack forward, enveloped
the entire craft. There were but few passengers, some half dozen men
and two slatternly attired women. Whither they were bound, he knew
not, nor cared; and, though they saluted him courteously, he
studiously avoided being drawn into their conversations. The emotional
appeal of the great river and its forest-lined banks did not at first
affect him. Yet he sought forgetfulness of self by concentrating his
thought upon them.

The massed foliage constituted an impenetrable wall on either side.
Everywhere his eyes met a maze of _lianas_, creeping plants, begonias,
and bizarre vegetable forms, shapes and hues of which he had never
before had any adequate conception. Often he caught the glint of
great, rare butterflies hovering in the early sunlight which filtered
through the interlaced fronds and branches. Often when the boat hugged
the bank he saw indescribable buds and blossoms, and multicolored
orchids clinging to the drooping _bejucos_ which festooned the
enormous trees. As the afternoon waned and the sun hung low, the magic
stillness of the solitude began to cast its spell about him, and he
could imagine that he was penetrating a fairy-land. The vast stream,
winding, broadening, ramifying round wooded islets, throwing out long,
dusky lagoons and swampy arms, incessantly plying its numberless
activities, at length held him enraptured. As he brooded over it all,
his thought wandered back to the exploits of the intrepid Quesada and
his stalwart band who, centuries before, had forced their perilous way
along this same river, amid showers of poisoned arrows from hostile
natives, amid the assaults of tropical storms and malarial fevers, to
the plateau of Cundinamarca, the home of the primitive Muiscas; and
there gathering fresh strength and inspiration, had pushed on to the
site of Santa Fe de Bogota.

A cry suddenly rang through the boat. "Man overboard!"

The clang of the pilot's bell stopped the clumsy craft; but not before
the ragged little <DW64> boy who had served at Jose's table as steward
had been swept far away by the rapid current.

The utmost confusion immediately prevailed. Every one of the rabble
rout of stokers, stewards, and stevedores lost his wits and set up a
frenzied yell. Some who remembered that there was such a thing, tore
at the ropes which held the single lifeboat. But the boat had been put
on for appearance's sake, not for service, and successfully resisted
all efforts at removal. No one dared risk his life in attempted
rescue, for the river swarmed with crocodiles. There was vain racing,
counseling and gesticulating; but at length, the first wave of
excitement over, passengers and crew settled down to watch the outcome
of the boy's struggle for life, while the pilot endeavored to turn the
unwieldy steamer about.

"Now is the time to put up a prayer for the youngster, Padre," said a
voice behind Jose.

The priest turned. The speaker was evidently a native Colombian. Jose
had noticed him on the boat when he embarked at Calamar, and surmised
that he had probably come up from Barranquilla.

"An excellent opportunity to try the merits of a prayer to the Virgin,
no? If she can fish us out of purgatory she ought to pull this boy out
of the river, eh?" continued the speaker with a cynical smile.

"I would rather trust to a canoe and a pair of stout arms than a
prayer at present," returned Jose with candor.

"_Corriente!_" replied the man; "my way of thinking, exactly! But if I
had a good rifle now I'd put that little fellow out of his misery, for
he's going down, sure!"

It was not unkindly said; and Jose appreciated the man's rude
sentiment. Minutes passed in strained silence.

"_Hombre!_" cried the man. "He's going!"

The lad was evidently weakening. The rapid, swirling current
continually frustrated his efforts to reach the shore. Again the head
went under.

"_Dios!_" Jose exclaimed. "Is there no help?"

Jesus had walked the waves. Yet here his earthly representative,
trained in all the learning and culture of Holy Church to be an _Alter
Christus_, stood helplessly by and watched a child drown! God above!
what avail religious creed and churchly dogma? How impotent the
beliefs of men in such an hour! Could the Holy Father himself, with
all his assumptions, spiritual and temporal--with all his power to
loose from sin and from the imaginary torments of purgatory--save this
drowning boy?

Jose turned away in bitterness of heart. As he did so a murmur of awe
arose from the spectators. The priest looked again down the river.
Impelled from below, the body of the boy was hurled out of the water.
Then, as it fell, it disappeared.

"_Cayman!_" gasped the horrified crew.

Jose stood spellbound, as the ghastly truth dawned upon him. A
crocodile, gliding beneath the struggling lad, had tossed him upward,
and caught him in its loathsome jaws when he fell. Then it had dragged
him beneath the yellow waters, where he was seen no more.

Life is held cheaply by the Magdalena <DW64>--excepting his own.
Shiftless and improvident child of the tropics, his animal wants
are readily satisfied by the fruits and fish which nature provides
for him so bountifully. Spiritual wants he has none--until calamity
touches him and he thinks he is about to die. Then witchcraft, charm,
incantation, the priest--anything that promises help is hurriedly
pressed into requisition to prolong his useless existence. If he
recovers, he forgets it all as hurriedly. The tragedy which had
just been enacted before the Honda's crew produced a ripple of
excitement--a momentary stirring of emotion--and was then speedily
forgotten, while the boat turned and drove its way up-stream against
the muddy waters.

But Jose could not forget. Nature had endowed him with a memory which
recorded as minutely and as lastingly as the phonographic cylinder.
The violent death of the boy haunted him, and mingled with the
recurrent memories of the sad passing of the little Maria, and his own
bitter life experience. Oh, the mystery of it all! The tragedy of
life! The sudden blighting of hopes! The ruthless crushing of hearts!
What did it mean? Did this infinite variety of good and evil which we
call life unite to manifest an infinite Creator? Nay, for then were
God more wicked than the lowest sinner! Was evil as real as good, and
more powerful? Yes. Did love and the soul's desire to be and do good
count for nothing in the end? No; for the end is death--always death!
And after that--who knows?

"We are coming to Banco, Padre," said the man who had addressed Jose
before, rousing him from his doleful meditations and pointing to the
lights of the distant town, now shimmering through the gathering
dusk.

As the boat with shrilly shrieking whistle drew near the landing, a
crowd hurriedly gathered on the bank to receive it. Venders of guava
jelly, rude pottery, and straw mats hastily spread out their
merchandise on the muddy ground and began to dilate loudly on their
merits. A scantily clad man held aloft a rare leopard skin, which he
vigorously offered for two _pesos_ gold. Slatternly women, peddling
queer delectables of uncertain composition, waved their thin, bare
arms and shrilly advertised their wares. Black, naked children bobbed
excitedly about; and gaunt dogs and shrieking pigs scampered
recklessly through the crowd and added to the general confusion. Here
and there Jose could see dignified looking men, dressed in white
cotton, and wearing straw--_jipijapa_--hats. These were merchants,
patiently awaiting consignments which they had perhaps ordered months
before. Crazy, ramshackle dwellings, perched unsteadily upon long,
slender stilts, rose from the water's edge; but substantial brick
buildings of fair size, with red-tile roofs and whitewashed walls,
mingled at intervals with the thatched mud huts and rude hovels
farther within the town. In a distant doorway he descried a woman
nursing a babe at one breast and a suckling pig at the other.
Convention is rigid in these Colombian river towns; but it is widely
inclusive.

"Come ashore with me, Padre, and forget what is worrying you," said
Jose's new acquaintance, taking him by the arm. "I have friends
here--_Hola!_ Padre Diego Guillermo!" he suddenly called, catching
sight of a black-frocked priest standing in the crowd on the shore.

The priest addressed, a short, stout, coarse-featured man of perhaps
forty, waved back a vigorous salutation.

"_Hombre!_" the man ejaculated, holding Jose's arm and starting down
the gangplank. "What new deviltry is the rogue up to now!"

The man and the priest addressed as Diego embraced warmly.

"Padre Diego Guillermo Polo, I have the extreme honor to present my
friend, the eminent Padre--" ceremoniously waving a hand toward Jose.

"Jose de Rincon," supplied the latter, bowing.

"Rincon!" murmured the priest Diego. Then, abruptly, "Of Cartagena?"

"Yes," returned Jose, with awakened interest.

"Not of Don Ignacio--?"

"My grandfather," Jose replied promptly, and with a touch of pride.

"Ha! he owned much property--many _fincas_--about here; and farther
west, in the Guamoco country, many mines, eh, Don Jorge?" exchanging a
significant look with the latter.

"But," he added, glancing at the perspiring Honda, "this old tub is
going to hang up here for the night. So do me the honor, senores, to
visit my little cell, and we will fight the cursed mosquitoes over a
sip of red rum. I have some of very excellent quality."

Jose and Don Jorge bowed their acquiescence and followed him up the
muddy road. The cell referred to consisted of a suite of several
rooms, commodiously furnished, and looking out from the second story
of one of the better colonial houses of the town upon a richly
blooming interior _patio_. As the visitors entered, a comely young
woman who had just lighted an oil-burning "student" lamp and placed it
upon the center table, disappeared into one of the more remote rooms.

"My niece," said the priest Diego, winking at Don Jorge as he set out
cigars and a _garrafon_ of Jamaica rum. "I have ordered a case of
American beer," he continued, lighting a cigar. "But that was two
months ago, and it hasn't arrived yet. _Diablo!_ but the good _medico_
tells me I drink too much rum for this very Christian climate."

Don Jorge swept the place with an appraising glance. "H'm," he
commented, as he poured himself a liberal libation from the
_garrafon_. "The Lord surely provides for His faithful children."

"Yes, the Lord, that's right," laughed Padre Diego; "still I am daily
rendering no small thanks to His Grace, Don Wenceslas, future Bishop
of Cartagena."

"And eminent services into the bargain, I'll venture," added Don
Jorge.

Padre Diego's eyes twinkled merrily. Jose started. Then even in this
remote town the artful Wenceslas maintained his agent!

"But our friend is neither drinking nor smoking," said Padre Diego,
turning inquiringly to Jose, who had left his glass untouched.

"With your permission," replied the latter; "I do not use liquor or
tobacco."

"Nor women either, eh?" laughed Padre Diego. "_Por Dios!_ what is it
the Dutchman says?

               'Wer nicht liebt Wein, Weib und Gesang,
               Der bleibt ein Narr sein Lebenlang.'

"_Caramba!_ but my German has all slipped from me."

"Don't worry," commented Don Jorge cynically; "for I'll wager it took
nothing good with it."

"_Hombre!_ but you are hard on a loyal servant of the Lord," exclaimed
Padre Diego in a tone of mock injury, as he drained another glass of
the fiery liquor.

"Servant of the Lord!" guffawed Don Jorge. "Of the Lord Pope, Lord
Wenceslas, or the Lord God, may we ask?"

"_Que chiste!_ Why, stupid, all three. I do not put all my eggs into
one basket, however large. But tell me, now," he inquired, turning the
conversation from himself, "what is it brings you into this region
forsaken of the gods?"

"_Sepulcros_," Don Jorge briefly announced.

"Ha! Indian graves again! But have you abandoned your quest of _La
Tumba del Diablo_, in the Sinu valley?"

"Naturally, since the records show that it was opened centuries ago.
And I spent a good year's search on it, too! _Dios!_ They say it
yielded above thirty thousand _pesos_ gold."

"_Diablo!_"

"But I am on the track of others. I go now to Medellin; then to
Remedios; and there outfit for a trip of grave hunting through the old
Guamoco district."

"Guamoco! Then you will naturally come down the Simiti trail, which
brings you out to the Magdalena."

"Simiti?" interrupted Jose eagerly, turning to the speaker. "Do you
know the place?"

"Somewhat!" replied Padre Diego, laughing. "I had charge of that
parish for a few months--"

"But found it highly convenient to leave, no?" finished the merciless
Don Jorge.

"_Caramba!_ Would you have me die of _ennui_ in such a hell-hole?"
cried Diego with some aspersion.

"Hell-hole!" echoed Jose. "Is it so bad as that?"

"_Hombre!_ Yes--worse! They say that after the good Lord created
heaven and earth He had a few handfuls of dirt left, and these He
threw away. But crafty Satan, always with an eye single to going the
Lord one better, slyly gathered this dirt together again and made
Simiti." Diego quickly finished another glass of rum, as if he would
drown the memory of the town.

Jose's heart slowly sank under the words.

"But why do you ask? You are not going there?" Padre Diego inquired.
Jose nodded an affirmative.

"_Diablo!_ Assigned?"

"Yes," in a voice scarcely audible.

The Padre whistled softly. "Then in that case," he said, brightening,
"we are brother sinners. So let us exchange confidences. What was your
crime, if one may ask?"

"Crime!" exclaimed Jose in amazement.

"Aye; who was she? Rich? Beautiful? Native? Or foreign? Come, the
story. We have a long night before us." And the coarse fellow settled
back expectantly in his chair.

Jose paled. "What do you mean?" he asked in a trembling voice.

"_Caramba!_" returned the Padre impatiently. "You surely know that no
respectable priest is ever sent to Simiti! That it is the good
Bishop's penal colony for fallen clergy--and, I may add, the refuge of
political offenders of this and adjacent countries. Why, the present
schoolmaster there is a political outcast from Salvador!"

"No, I did not know it," replied Jose.

"_Por Dios!_ Then you are being jobbed, _amigo_! Did Don Wenceslas
give you letters to the Alcalde?"

"Yes."

"And--by the way, has Wenceslas been misbehaving of late?--for when he
does, somebody other than himself has to settle the score."

Jose remained silent.

"Ah," mused Diego, "but Don Wenceslas is artful. And yet, I think I
see the direction of his trained hand in this." Then he burst into a
rude laugh. "Come, _amigo_," he said, noting Jose's dejected mien;
"let us have your story. We may be able to advise. And we've had
experience--eh, Don Jorge?"

But Jose slowly shook his head. What mattered it now? Simiti would
serve as well to bury him as any other tomb. He knew he was sent as a
lamb to the slaughter. But it was his affair--and his God's. Honor and
conscience had presented the score; and he was paying in full. His was
not a story to be bandied about by lewd priests like Padre Diego.

"No," he replied to the Padre's insistent solicitations; "with your
permission, we will talk of it no more."

"But--_Hombre_!" cried the Padre at last, in his coarse way stirred by
Jose's evident truthfulness. "Well--as you wish--I will not pry into
your secrets. But, take a bit of counsel from one who knows: when you
reach Simiti, inquire for a man who hates me, one Rosendo Ariza--"

At this juncture the Honda's diabolical whistle pierced the murky
night air.

"_Caramba!_" cried Don Jorge, starting up. "Are they going to try the
river to-night?" And the men hurried back to the landing.

The moon was up, and the boat was getting under way. Padre Diego went
aboard to take leave of his friends.

"_Bien, amigo_," he said to Don Jorge; "I am sorry your stay is so
short. I had much to tell you. Interesting developments are forward,
and I hope you are well out of Guamoco when the trouble starts. For
the rivals of Antioquia and Simiti will pay off a few scores in the
next revolution--a few left over from the last; and it would be well
not to get caught between them when they come together."

"And so it is coming?" said Don Jorge thoughtfully.

"Coming! _Hombre!_ It is all but here! The Hercules went up-river
yesterday. You will pass her. She has gone to keep a look-out in the
vicinity of Puerto Berrio. I am sorry for our friend," nodding toward
Jose, who was leaning over the boat's rail at some distance; "but
there is a job there. He doesn't belong in this country. And Simiti
will finish him."

"Bah! only another priest less--and a weak-kneed one at that," said
Don Jorge with contempt; "and we have too many of them now, Lord
knows!"

"You forget that I am a priest," chuckled Diego.

"You! Yes, so you are," laughed Don Jorge; "but of the diocese of
hell! Well, we're off. I'll send a runner down the trail when I reach
the Tigui river; and if you will have a letter in Simiti informing me
of the status of things political, he can bring it up. _Conque_,
_adios_, my consummate villain."

The Honda, whistling prodigiously, swung out into mid-stream and set
her course up-river, warily feeling through the velvety darkness for
the uncertain channel. Once she grated over a hidden bar and hung for
a few moments, while her stack vomited torrents of sparks and her
great wheel angrily churned the water into creamy foam in the clear
moonlight. Once, rounding a sharp bend, she collided squarely with a
huge mahogany tree, rolling and plunging menacingly in the seaward
rushing waters.

"_Diablo!_" muttered Don Jorge, as he helped Jose swing his hammock
and adjust the mosquito netting. "I shall offer a candle a foot thick
to the blessed Virgin if I reach Puerto Berrio safely! _Santo Dios!_"
as the boat grazed another sand bar. "I've heard tell of steamers
hanging up on bars in this river for six weeks! And look!" pointing to
the projecting smoke-stack of a sunken steamer. "_Caramba!_ That is
what we just escaped!"

But Jose manifested slight interest in the dangers of river
navigation. His thoughts were revolving about the incidents of the
past few days, and, more especially, about Padre Diego and his
significant words. Don Jorge had volunteered no further explanation of
the man or his conversation; and Jose's reticence would not permit him
to make other inquiry. But, after all, his thought-processes always
evolved the same conclusion: What mattered it now? His interest in
life was at an end. He had not told Don Jorge of his experience with
the leper in Maganguey. He was trying to forget it. But his hand ached
cruelly; and the pain was always associated with loathsome and
repellant thoughts of the event.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The eastern sky was blushing at the approach of the amorous sun when
Jose left his hammock and prepared to endure another day on the river.
To the south the deep blue vault of heaven was dotted with downy
clouds. Behind the laboring steamer the river glittered through a
dazzling white haze. Ahead, its course was traceable for miles by the
thin vapor always rising from it. The jungle on either side was
brilliant with color and resonant with the songs of forest lyrists. In
the lofty fronds of venerable palms and cedars noisy macaws gossiped
and squabbled, and excited monkeys discussed the passing boat and
commented volubly on its character. In the shallow water at the margin
of the river blue herons and spindle-legged cranes were searching out
their morning meal. Crocodiles lay dozing on the _playas_, with mouths
opened invitingly to the stupid birds which were sure to yield to the
mesmerism. Far in the distance up-stream a young deer was drinking at
the water's edge.

The charm of the rare scene held the priest spellbound. As he gazed
upon it a king vulture--called by the natives the Vulture Papa, or
Pope Vulture--suddenly swooped down from the depths of heaven and,
lighting upon the carcass of a monster crocodile floating down the
river, began to feast upon the choicest morsels, while the buzzards
which had been circling about the carrion and feeding at will
respectfully withdrew until the royal appetite should be satiated.

"Holy graft, eh, Padre?" commented Don Jorge, coming up. "Those
brainless buzzards, if they only knew it and had sense enough to
unite, could strip every feather off that swaggering vulture and send
him packing. Fools! And we poor Colombians, if we had the courage,
could as easily throw the Church into the sea, holy candles, holy
oils, holy incense and all! _Diablo!_ But we are fleeced like sheep!"

To Jose it did not seem strange that this man should speak so frankly
to him, a priest. He felt that Don Jorge was not so much lacking in
courtesy and delicate respect for the feelings and opinions of others
as he was ruggedly honest and fearlessly sincere in his hatred of the
dissimulation and graft practiced upon the ignorant and unsuspecting.
For the rest of the day Don Jorge was busy with his maps and papers,
and Jose was left to himself.

The character of the landscape had altered with the narrowing of the
stream, and the river-plain now lay in a great volcanic basin flanked
by distant verdure-clad hills. Far to the southwest Jose could see the
faint outlines of the lofty _Cordilleras_. Somewhere in that direction
lay Simiti. And back of it lay the ancient treasure house of Spain,
where countless thousands of sweating slaves had worn out their
straining bodies under the goad and lash, that the monarchs of Castile
might carry on their foolish religious wars and attempt their vain
projects of self-aggrandizement.

The day wore on without interest, and darkness closed in quickly when
the sun dropped behind the _Sierras_. It was to be Jose's last night
on the Magdalena, for the captain had told him that, barring disaster,
the next afternoon should find them at Badillo. After the evening meal
the priest took his chair to the bow of the steamer and gave himself
over to the gentle influences of the rare and soothing environment.
The churning of the boat was softly echoed by the sleeping forest. The
late moon shimmered through clouds of murky vapor, and cast ghostly
reflections along the broad river. The balmy air, trembling with the
radiating heat, was impregnated with sweetest odors from the myriad
buds and balsamic plants of the dark jungle wilderness on either hand,
where impervious walls rose in majestic, deterrant, awesome silence
from the low shore line, and tangled shrubs and bushes, rioting in
wild profusion, jealously hung to the water's edge that they might
hide every trace of the muddy banks. What shapes and forms the black
depths of that untrodden bush hid from his eyes, Jose might only
imagine. But he felt their presence--crawling, creeping things that
lay in patient ambush for their unwitting prey--slimy lizards,
gorgeously caparisoned--dank, twisting serpents--elephantine
tapirs--dull-witted sloths--sleek, wary jaguars--fierce formicidae,
poisonous and carnivorous. He might not see them, but he felt that he
was the cynosure of hundreds of keen eyes that followed him as the
boat glided close to the shore and silently crept through the shadows
which lay thick upon the river's edge. And the matted jungle, with its
colossal vegetation, he felt was peopled with other things--influences
intangible, and perhaps still unreal, but mightily potent with the
symbolized presence of the great Unknown, which stands back of all
phenomena and eagerly watches the movements of its children. These
influences had already cast their spell upon him. He was yielding,
slowly, to the "lure of the tropics," which few who come under its
attachment ever find the strength to dispel.

No habitations were visible on the dark shores. Only here and there in
the yellow glow of the boat's lanterns appeared the customary piles
of wood which the natives sell to the passing steamers for boiler
fuel, and which are found at frequent intervals along the river. At
one of these the Honda halted to replenish its supply. The usual
bickering between the <DW64> owner and the boat captain resulted in a
bargain, and the half-naked stevedores began to transfer the wood to
the vessel, carrying it on their shoulders in the most primitive
manner, held in a strip of burlap. The rising moon had at last thrown
off its veil of murky clouds, and was shining in undimmed splendor in
a starry sky. Jose went ashore with the passengers; for the boat might
remain there for hours while her crew labored leisurely, with much
bantering and singing, and no anxious thought for the morrow.

The strumming of a _tiple_ in the distance attracted him. Following
it, he found a small settlement of bamboo huts hidden away in a
beautiful grove of moriche palms, through which the moonbeams filtered
in silvery stringers. Little gardens lay back of the dwellings, and
the usual number of goats and pigs were dozing in the heavy shadows of
the scarcely stirring trees. Reserved matrons and shy _doncellas_
appeared in the doorways; and curious children, naked and chubby, hid
in their mothers' scant skirts and peeped cautiously out at the
newcomers. The tranquil night was sweet with delicate odors wafted
from numberless plants and blossoms in the adjacent forest, and with
the fragrance breathed from the roses, gardenias and dahlias with
which these unpretentious dwellings were fairly embowered. A spirit of
calm and peaceful contentment hovered over the spot, and the round,
white moon smiled down in holy benediction upon the gentle folk who
passed their simple lives in this bower of delight, free from the goad
of human ambition, untrammeled by the false sense of wealth and its
entailments, and unspoiled by the artificialities of civilization.

One of the passengers suggested a dance, while waiting for the boat to
take on its fuel. The owner of the wood, apparently the chief
authority of the little settlement, immediately procured a _tom-tom_,
and gave orders for the _baile_. At his direction men, women and
children gathered in the moonlit clearing on the river bank and, while
the musician beat a monotonous tattoo on the crude drum, circled about
in the stately and dignified movements of their native dance.

It was a picture that Jose would not forget. The balmy air, soft as
velvet, and laden with delicious fragrance; the vast solitude,
stretching in trackless wilderness to unknown reaches on either hand;
the magic stillness of the tropic night; the figures of the dancers
weirdly silhouetted in the gorgeous moonlight; with the low, unvaried
beat of the _tom-tom_ rising dully through the warm air--all merged
into a scene of exquisite beauty and delight, which made an indelible
impression upon the priest's receptive mind.

And when the sounds of simple happiness had again died into silence,
and he lay in his hammock, listening to the spirit of the jungle
sighing through the night-blown palms, as the boat glided gently
through the lights and shadows of the quiet river, his soul voiced a
nameless yearning, a vague, unformed longing for an approach to the
life of simple content and child-like happiness of the kind and gentle
folk with whom he had been privileged to make this brief sojourn.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The crimson flush of the dawn-sky heralded another day of implacable
heat. The emerald coronals of palms and towering _caobas_ burned in
the early beams of the torrid sun. Light fogs rose reluctantly from
the river's bosom and dispersed in delicate vapors of opal and violet.
The tangled banks of dripping bush shone freshly green in the misty
light. The wilderness, grim and trenchant, reigned in unchallenged
despotism. Solitude, soul-oppressing, unbroken but for the calls of
feathered life, brooded over the birth of Jose's last day on the
Magdalena. About midday the steamer touched at the little village of
Bodega Central; but the iron-covered warehouse and the whitewashed mud
hovels glittered garishly in the fierce heat and stifled all desire to
go ashore. The call was brief, and the boat soon resumed its course
through the solitude and heat of the mighty river.

Immediately after leaving Bodega Central, Don Jorge approached Jose
and beckoned him to an unoccupied corner of the boat.

"_Amigo_," he began, after assuring himself that his words would not
carry to the other passengers, "the captain tells me the next stop is
Badillo, where you leave us. If all goes well you will be in Simiti
to-night. No doubt a report of our meeting with Padre Diego has
already reached Don Wenceslas, who, you may be sure, has no thought of
forgetting you. I have no reason to tell you this other than the fact
that I think, as Padre Diego put it, you are being jobbed--not by the
Church, but by Wenceslas. I want to warn you, that is all. I hate
priests! They got me early--got my wife and girl, too! I hate the
Church, and the whole ghastly farce which it puts over on the ignorant
people of this country! But--," eying him sharply, "I would hardly
class you as a _real_ priest. There, never mind!" as Jose was about to
interrupt. "I think I understand. You simply went wrong. You meant
well, but something happened--as always does when one means well in
this world. But now to the point."

Shifting his chair closer to Jose, the man resumed earnestly.

"Your grandfather, Don Ignacio, was a very rich man. The war stripped
him. He got just what he deserved. His _fincas_ and herds and mines
melted away from him like grease from a holy candle. And nobody
cared--any more than the Lord cares about candle grease. Most of his
property fell into the hands of his former slaves--and he had hundreds
of them hereabouts. But his most valuable possession, the great mine
of La Libertad, disappeared as completely as if blotted from the face
of the earth.

"That mine--no, not a mine, but a mountain of free gold--was located
somewhere in the Guamoco district. After the war this whole country
slipped back into the jungle, and had to be rediscovered. The Guamoco
region is to-day as unknown as it was before the Spaniards came.
Somewhere in the district, but covered deep beneath brush and forest
growth, is that mine, the richest in Colombia.

"Now, as you know, Don Ignacio left this country in considerable of a
hurry. But I think he always intended to come back again. Death killed
that ambition. I don't know about his sons. But the fact remains that
La Libertad has never been rediscovered since Don Ignacio's day. The
old records in Cartagena show the existence of such a mine in Spanish
times, and give a more or less accurate statement of its production.
_Diablo_! I hesitate to say how much! The old fellow had _arrastras_,
mills, and so on, in which slaves crushed the ore. The bullion was
melted into bars and brought down the trail to Simiti, where he had
agents and warehouses and a store or two. From there it was shipped
down the river to Cartagena. But the war lasted thirteen years. And
during that time everything was in a state of terrible confusion. The
existence of mines was forgotten. The plantations were left unworked.
The male population was all but killed off. And the country sank back
into wilderness.

"_Bueno_; so much for history. Now to your friends on the coast--and
elsewhere. Don Wenceslas is quietly searching for that mine--has been
for years. He put his agent, Padre Diego, in Simiti to learn what he
might there. But the fool priest was run out after he had ruined a
woman or two. However, Padre Diego is still in close touch with the
town, and is on the keen search for La Libertad. Wenceslas thinks
there may be descendants of some of Don Ignacio's old slaves still
living in Simiti, or near there, and that they know the location of
the lost mine. And, if I mistake not, he figures that you will learn
the secret from them in some way, and that the mine will again come to
light. Now, if you get wind of that mine and attempt to locate it, or
purchase it from the natives, you will be beaten out of it in a hurry.
And you may be sure Don Wenceslas will be the one who will eventually
have it, for there is no craftier, smoother, brighter rascal in
Colombia than he. And so, take it from me, if you ever get wind of the
location of that famous property--which by rights is yours, having
belonged to your grandfather--_keep the information strictly to
yourself_!

"I do not know Simiti. But I shall be working in the Guamoco district
for many months to come, hunting Indian graves. I shall have my
runners up and down the Simiti trail frequently, and may get in touch
with you. It may be that you will need a friend. There! The boat is
whistling for Badillo. A last word: Keep out of the way of both
Wenceslas and Diego--cultivate the people of Simiti--and keep your
mouth closed."

A few minutes later Jose stood on the river bank beside his little
haircloth trunk and traveling bag, sadly watching the steamer draw
away and resume her course up-stream. He watched it until it
disappeared around a bend. And then he stood watching the smoke rise
above the treetops, until that, too, faded in the distance. No one had
waved him a farewell from the boat. No one met him with a greeting of
welcome on the shore. He was a stranger among strangers.

He turned, with a heavy heart, to note his environment. It was a
typical riverine point. A single street, if it might be so called; a
half dozen bamboo dwellings, palm-thatched; and a score of natives,
with their innumerable gaunt dogs and porcine companions--this was
Badillo.

"_Senor Padre._" A tall, finely built native, clad in soiled white
cotton shirt and trousers, approached and addressed him in a kindly
tone. "Where do you go?"

"To Simiti," replied the priest, turning eagerly to the man. "But," in
bewilderment, "where is it?"

"Over there," answered the native, pointing to the jungle on the far
side of the river. "Many leagues."

The wearied priest sat down on his trunk and buried his face in his
hands. Faintness and nausea seized him. It was the after-effect of his
long and difficult river experience. Or, perhaps, the deadly malaria
was beginning its insidious poisoning. The man approached and laid a
hand on his shoulder.

"Padre, why do you go to Simiti?"

Jose raised his head and looked more closely at his interlocutor. The
native was a man of perhaps sixty years. His figure was that of an
athlete. He stood well over six feet high, with massive shoulders, and
a waist as slender as a woman's. His face was almost black in color,
and mottled with patches of white, so common to the natives of the hot
inlands. But there was that in its expression, a something that
looked out through those kindly black eyes, that assured Jose and
bespoke his confidence.

The man gravely repeated his question.

"I have been sent there by the Bishop of Cartagena. I am to have
charge of the parish," Jose replied.

The man slowly shook his finely shaped head.

"We want no priest in Simiti," he said with quiet firmness. His manner
of speaking was abrupt, yet not ungracious.

"But--do you live there?" inquired Jose anxiously.

"Yes, Padre."

"Then you must know a man--Rosendo, I think his name--"

"I am Rosendo Ariza."

Jose looked eagerly at the man. Then he wearily stretched out a hand.

"Rosendo--I am sick--I think. And--I have--no friends--"

Rosendo quickly grasped his hand and slipped an arm about his
shoulders.

"I am your friend, Padre--" He stopped and appeared to reflect for a
moment. Then he added quickly, "My canoe is ready; and we must hurry,
or night will overtake us."

The priest essayed to rise, but stumbled. Then, as if he had been a
child, the man Rosendo picked him up and carried him down the bank to
a rude canoe, where he deposited him on a pile of empty bags in the
keel.

"Escolastico!" he called back to a young man who seemed to be the
chief character of the village. "Sell the _panela_ and yuccas _a buen
precio_; and remind Captain Julio not to forget on the next trip to
bring the little Carmen a doll from Barranquilla. I will be over again
next month. And Juan," addressing the sturdy youth who was preparing
to accompany him, "set in the Padre's baggage; and do you take the
paddle, and I will pole. _Conque, adioscito!_" waving his battered
straw hat to the natives congregated on the bank, while Juan pushed
the canoe from the shore and paddled vigorously out into the river.

"_Adioscito! adioscito! Don Rosendo y Juan!_" The hearty farewells of
the natives followed the canoe far out into the broad stream.

Across the open river in the livid heat of the early afternoon the
canoe slowly made its way. The sun from a cloudless sky viciously
poured down its glowing rays like molten metal. The boat burned; the
river steamed; the water was hot to his touch, when the priest feebly
dipped his hands into it and bathed his throbbing brow. Badillo faded
from view as they rounded a densely wooded island and entered a long
lagoon. Here they lost the slight breeze which they had had on the
main stream. In this narrow channel, hemmed in between lofty forest
walls of closely woven vines and foliage, it seemed to Jose that they
had entered a flaming inferno. The two boatmen sat silent and
inscrutable, plying their paddles without speaking.

Down the long lagoon the canoe drifted, keeping within what scant
shade the banks afforded, for the sun stood now directly overhead. The
heat was everywhere, insistent, unpitying. It burned, scalded, warped.
The foliage on either side of the channel merged into the hot waves
that rose trembling about them. The thin, burning air enveloped the
little craft with fire. Jose gasped for breath. His tongue swelled.
His pulse throbbed violently. His skin cracked. The quivering
appearance of the atmosphere robbed him of confidence in his own
vision. A cloud of insects hung always before his sight. Dead silence
lay upon the scene. Not a sound issued from the jungle. Not a bird or
animal betrayed its presence. The canoe was edging the Colombian
"hells," where even the denizens of the forest dare not venture forth
on the low, open _savannas_ in the killing heat of midday.

Jose sank down in the boat, wilting and semi-delirious. Through his
dimmed eyes the boatman looked like glowing inhuman things set in
flames. Rosendo came to him and placed his straw hat over his face.
Hours, interminable and torturing, seemed to pass on leaden wings.
Then Juan, deftly swerving his paddle, shot the canoe into a narrow
arm, and the garish sunlight was suddenly lost in the densely
intertwined branches overhanging the little stream.

"The outlet of _La Cienaga_, Padre," Rosendo offered, laying aside his
paddle and taking his long boat pole. "Lake Simiti flows through this
and into the Magdalena." For a few moments he held the canoe steady,
while from his wallet he drew a few leaves of tobacco and deftly
rolled a long, thick cigar.

The real work of the _boga_ now began, and Rosendo with his long
punter settled down to the several hours' strenuous grind which was
necessary to force the heavy canoe up the little outlet and into the
distant lake beyond. Back and forth he traveled through the
half-length of the boat, setting the pole well forward in the soft
bank, or out into the stream itself, and then, with its end against
his shoulder, urging and teasing the craft a few feet at a time
against the strong current. Jose imagined, as he dully watched him,
that he could see death in the pestiferous effluvia which emanated
from the black, slimy mud which every plunge of the long pole brought
to the surface of the narrow stream.

The afternoon slowly waned, and the temperature lowered a few degrees.
A warm, animal-like breath drifted languidly out from the moist
jungle. The outlet, or _cano_, was heavily shaded throughout its
length. Crocodiles lay along its muddy banks, and slid into the water
at the approach of the canoe. Huge _iguanas_, the gorgeously 
lizards of tropical America, scurried noisily through the overarching
branches. Here and there monkeys peeped curiously at the intruders and
chattered excitedly as they swung among the lofty treetops. But for
his exhaustion, Jose, as he lay propped up against his trunk, gazing
vacantly upon the slowly unrolling panorama of marvelous plant and
animal life on either hand, might have imagined himself in a realm of
enchantment.

At length the vegetation abruptly ceased; the stream widened; and the
canoe entered a broad lake, at the far end of which, three miles
distant, its two whitewashed churches and its plastered houses
reflecting the red glow of the setting sun, lay the ancient and
decayed town of Simiti, the northern outlet of Spain's mediaeval
treasure house, at the edge of the forgotten district of Guamoco.

Paddling gently across the unruffled surface of the tepid waters,
Rosendo and Juan silently urged the canoe through the fast gathering
dusk, and at length drew up on the shaly beach of the old town. As
they did so, a little girl, bare of feet and with clustering brown
curls, came running out of the darkness.

"Oh, padre Rosendo," she called, "what have you brought me?"

Then, as she saw Rosendo and Juan assisting the priest from the boat,
she drew back abashed.

"Look, Carmencita," whispered Juan to the little maid; "we've brought
you a _big_ doll, haven't we?"

Night fell as the priest stepped upon the shore of his new home.




CARMEN ARIZA




BOOK 2


  Ay, to save and redeem and restore, snatch Saul, the mistake,
  Saul, the failure, the ruin he seems now,--and bid him awake from
  the dream, the probation, the prelude, to find himself set clear
  and safe in new light and new life,--a new harmony yet to be run
  and continued and ended.

                                                       --_Browning._




CARMEN ARIZA

CHAPTER 1


Jose de Rincon opened his eyes and turned painfully on his hard bed.
The early sun streamed through the wooden grating before the unglazed
window. A slight, tepid breeze stirred the mosquito netting over him.
He was in the single sleeping room of the house. It contained another
bed like his own, of rough _macana_ palm strips, over which lay a
straw mat and a thin red blanket. Bed springs were unknown in Simiti.
On the rude door, cobwebbed and dusty, a scorpion clung torpidly. From
the room beyond he heard subdued voices. His head and limbs ached
dully; and frightful memories of the river trip and the awful journey
from Badillo sickened him. With painful exertion he stood upon the
moist dirt floor and drew on his damp clothes. He had only a vague
recollection of the preceding night, but he knew that Rosendo had half
led, half dragged him past rows of dimly lighted, ghostly white houses
to his own abode, and there had put him to bed.

"_Muy buenos dias, Senor Padre_," Rosendo greeted him, as the priest
dragged himself out into the living room. "You have slept long. But
the senora will soon have your breakfast. Sit here--not in the sun!"

Rosendo placed one of the rough wooden chairs, with straight cowhide
back and seat, near the table.

"Carmencita has gone to the boat for fresh water. But--here she comes.
Pour the _Senor Padre_ a cup, _carita_," addressing a little girl who
at that moment entered the doorway, carrying a large earthen bottle on
her shoulder. It was the child who had met the boat when the priest
arrived the night, before.

"Fill the basin, too, _chiquita_, that the Padre may wash his hands,"
added Rosendo.

The child approached Jose, and with a dignified little courtesy and a
frank smile offered him a cup of the lukewarm water. The priest
accepted it languidly. But, glancing into her face, his eyes suddenly
widened, and the hand that was carrying the tin cup to his lips
stopped.

The barefoot girl, clad only in a short, sleeveless calico gown, stood
before him like a portrait from an old master. Her skin was almost
white, with but a tinge of olive. Her dark brown hair hung in curls to
her shoulders and framed a face of rarest beauty. Innocence, purity,
and love radiated from her fair features, from her beautifully rounded
limbs, from her soft, dark eyes that looked so fearlessly into his
own.

Jose felt himself strangely moved. Somewhere deep within his soul a
chord had been suddenly struck by the little presence; and the sound
was unfamiliar to him. Yet it awakened memories of distant scenes, of
old dreams, and forgotten longings. It seemed to echo from realms of
his soul that had never been penetrated. The tumult within died away.
The raging thought sank into calm. The man forgot himself, forgot that
he had come to Simiti to die. His sorrow vanished. His sufferings
faded. He remained conscious only of something that he could not
outline, something in the soul of the child, a thing that perhaps he
once possessed, and that he knew he yet prized above all else on
earth.

He heard Rosendo's voice through an immeasurable distance--

"Leave us now, _chiquita_; the Padre wishes to have his breakfast."

The child without speaking turned obediently; and the priest's eyes
followed her until she disappeared into the kitchen.

"We call her 'the smile of God,'" said Rosendo, noting the priest's
absorption, "because she is always happy."

Jose remained sunk in thought. Then--

"A beautiful child!" he murmured. "A wonderfully beautiful child! I
had no idea--!"

"Yes, Padre, she is heaven's gift to us poor folk. I sometimes think
the angels themselves left her on the river bank."

"On the river bank!" Jose was awake now. "Why--she was not born
here?"

"Oh, no, Padre, but in Badillo."

"Ah, then you once lived in Badillo?"

"_Na, Senor Padre_, she is not my child--except that the good God has
given her to me to protect."

"Not your child! Then whose is she?" The priest's voice was unwontedly
eager and his manner animated.

But Rosendo fell suddenly quiet and embarrassed, as if he realized
that already he had said too much to a stranger. A shade of suspicion
seemed to cross his face, and he rose hurriedly and went out into the
kitchen. A moment later he returned with the priest's breakfast--two
fried eggs, a hot corn _arepa_, fried _platanos_, dried fish, and
coffee sweetened with _panela_.

"When you have finished, Padre, we will visit the Alcalde," he said
quietly. "I must go down to the lake now to speak with Juan before he
goes out to fish."

Jose finished his meal alone. The interest which had been aroused by
the child continued to increase without reaction. His torpid soul had
been profoundly stirred. For the moment, though he knew not why, life
seemed to hold a vague, unshaped interest for him. He began to notice
his environment; he even thought he relished the coarse food set
before him.

The house he was in was a typical native three-room dwelling, built of
strips of _macana_ palm, set upright and tied together with pieces of
slender, tough _bejuco_ vine. The interstices between the strips were
filled with mud, and the whole whitewashed. The floors were dirt,
trodden hard; the steep-pitched roof was thatched with palm. A few
chairs like the one he occupied, the rude, uncovered table, some cheap
prints and a battered crucifix on the wall, were the only furnishings
of the living room.

While he was eating, the people of the town congregated quietly
about the open door. Friendly curiosity to see the new Padre, and
sincere desire to welcome him animated their simple minds. Naked
babes crawled to the threshold and peeped timidly in. Coarsely
clad women and young girls, many of the latter bedizened with bits
of bright ribbon or cheap trinkets, smiled their gentle greetings.
Black, dignified men, bare of feet, and wearing white cotton trousers
and black _ruanas_--the cape affected by the poor males of the
inlands--respectfully doffed their straw hats and bowed to him.
Rosendo's wife appeared from the kitchen and extended her hand to
him in unfeigned hospitality. Attired in a fresh calico gown, her
black hair plastered back over her head and tied with a clean black
ribbon, her bare feet encased in hemp sandals, she bore herself
with that grace and matronly dignity so indicative of her Spanish
forbears, and so particularly characteristic of the inhabitants of
this "valley of the pleasant 'yes.'"

Breakfast finished, the priest stepped to the doorway and raised his
hand in the invocation that was evidently expected from him.

"_Dominus vobiscum_," he repeated, not mechanically, not insincerely,
but in a spirit of benevolence, of genuine well-wishing, which his
contact with the child a few minutes before seemed to have aroused.

The people bent their heads piously and murmured, "_Et cum spiritu
tuo._"

The open door looked out upon the central _plaza_, where stood a large
church of typical colonial design and construction, and with a single
lateral bell tower. The building was set well up on a platform of
shale, with broad shale steps, much broken and worn, leading up to it
on all sides. Jose stepped out and mingled with the crowd, first
regarding the old church curiously, and then looking vainly for the
little girl, and sighing his disappointment when he did not see her.

In the _plaza_ he was joined by Rosendo; and together they went to
the house of the Alcalde. On the way the priest gazed about him with
growing curiosity. To the north of the town stretched the lake, known
to the residents only by the name of _La Cienaga_. It was a body of
water of fair size, in a setting of exquisite tropical beauty. In
a temperate climate, and a region more densely populated, this
lake would have been priceless. Here in forgotten Guamoco it lay like
an undiscovered gem, known only to those few inert and passive folk,
who enjoyed it with an inadequate sense of its rare beauty and
immeasurable worth. Several small and densely wooded isles rose
from its unrippled bosom; and tropical birds of brilliant color
hovered over it in the morning sun. Near one of its margins Jose
distinguished countless white _garzas_, the graceful herons whose
plumes yield the coveted aigrette of northern climes. They fed
undisturbed, for this region sleeps unmolested, far from the beaten
paths of tourist or vandal huntsman. To the west and south lay the
hills of Guamoco, and the lofty _Cordilleras_, purpling in the
light mist. Over the entire scene spread a damp warmth, like the
atmosphere of a hot-house. By midday Jose knew that the heat would
be insufferable.

The Alcalde, Don Mario Arvila, conducted his visitors through his
shabby little store and into the _patio_ in the rear, exclaiming
repeatedly, "Ah, _Senor Padre_, we welcome you! All Simiti welcomes
you and kisses your hand!" In the shade of his arbor he sat down to
examine Jose's letters from Cartagena.

Don Mario was a large, florid man, huge of girth, with brown skin,
heavy jowls, puffed eyes, and bald head. As he read, his eyes snapped,
and at times he paused and looked up curiously at the priest. Then,
without comment, he folded the letters and put them into a pocket of
his crash coat.

"_Bien_," he said politely, "we must have the Padre meet Don Felipe
Alcozer as soon as he returns. Some repairs are needed on the
church; a few of the roof tiles have slipped, and the rain enters.
Perhaps, _Senor Padre_, you may say the Mass there next Sunday. We
will see. A--a--you had illustrious ancestors, Padre," he added with
hesitation.

"Do the letters mention my ancestry?" asked Jose with something of
mingled surprise and pride.

"They speak of your family, which was, as we all know, quite
renowned," replied the Alcalde courteously.

"Very," agreed Jose, wondering how much the Alcalde knew of his
family.

"Don Ignacio was not unknown in this _pueblo_," affably continued the
Alcalde.

At these words Rosendo started visibly and looked fixedly at the
priest.

"The family name of Rincon," the Alcalde went on, "appears on the old
records of Simiti in many places, and it is said that Don Ignacio
himself came here more than once. Perhaps you know, _Senor Padre_,
that the Rincon family erected the church which stands in the _plaza_?
And so it is quite appropriate that their son should officiate in it
after all these centuries, is it not?"

No, Jose had not known it. He could not have imagined such a thing. He
knew little of his family's history. Of their former vast wealth he
had a vague notion. But here in this land of romance and tragedy he
seemed to be running upon their reliques everywhere.

The conversation drifted to parish matters; and soon Rosendo urged
their departure, as the sun was mounting high.

Seated at the table for the midday lunch, Jose again became lost in
contemplation of the child before him. Her fair face flushed under his
searching gaze; but she returned a smile of confidence and sweet
innocence that held him spellbound. Her great brown eyes were of
infinite depth. They expressed a something that he had never seen
before in human eyes. What manner of soul lay behind them? What was it
that through them looked out into this world of evil? Childish
innocence and purity, yes; but vastly more. Was it--God Himself? Jose
started at his own thought. Through his meditations he heard Rosendo's
voice.

"Simiti is very old, Padre. In the days of the Spaniards it was a
large town, with many rich people. The Indians were all slaves then,
and they worked in the mines up there," indicating the distant
mountains. "Much gold was brought down here and shipped down the
Magdalena, for the _cano_ was wider in those days, and it was not so
hard to reach the river. This is the end of the Guamoco trail, which
was called in those days the _Camino Real_."

"You say the mines were very rich?" interrogated Jose; not that the
question expressed a more than casual interest, but rather to keep
Rosendo talking while he studied the child.

But at this question Rosendo suddenly became less loquacious. Jose
then felt that he was suspected of prying into matters which Rosendo
did not wish to discuss with him, and so he pressed the topic no
further.

"How many people did Don Mario say the parish contained?" he asked by
way of diverting the conversation.

"About two hundred, Padre."

"And it has been vacant long?"

"Four years."

"Four years since Padre Diego was here," commented Jose casually.

It was an unfortunate remark. At the mention of the former priest's
name Dona Maria hurriedly left the table. Rosendo's black face grew
even darker, and took on a look of ineffable contempt. He did not
reply. And the meal ended in silence.

It was now plain to Jose that Rosendo distrusted him. But it mattered
little to the priest, beyond the fact that he had no wish to offend
any one. What interest had he in boorish Simiti, or Guamoco? The place
was become his tomb--he had entered it to die. The child--the girl!
Ah, yes, she had touched a strange chord within him; and for a time he
had seemed to live again. But as the day waned, and pitiless heat and
deadly silence brooded over the decayed town, his starving soul sank
again into its former depression, and revived hope and interest died
within him.

The implacable heat burned through the noon hour; the dusty streets
were like the floor of a stone oven; the shale beds upon which the old
town rested sent up fiery, quivering waves; the houses seethed; earth
and sky were ablaze. How long could he endure it?

And the terrible _ennui_, the isolation, the utter lack of every trace
of culture, of the varied interests that feed the educated, trained
mind and minister to its comfort and growth--could he support it
patiently while awaiting the end? Would he go mad before the final
release came? He did not fear death; but he was horror-stricken at the
thought of madness! Of losing that rational sense of the Ego which
constituted his normal individuality!

Rosendo advised him to retire for the midday _siesta_. Through the
seemingly interminable afternoon he lay upon his hard bed with his
brain afire, while the events of his warped life moved before him in
spectral review. The week which had passed since he left Cartagena
seemed an age. When he might hope to receive word from the outside
world, he could not imagine. His isolation was now complete. Even
should letters succeed in reaching Simiti for him, they must first
pass through the hands of the Alcalde.

And what did the Alcalde know of him? And then, again, what did it
matter? He must not lose sight of the fact that his interest in the
outside world--nay, his interest in all things had ceased. This was
the end. He had yielded, after years of struggle, to pride, fear,
doubt. He had bowed before his morbid sense of honor--a perverted
sense, he now admitted, but still one which bound him in fetters of
steel. His life had been one of grossest inconsistency. He was utterly
out of tune with the universe. His incessant clash with the world of
people and events had sounded nothing but agonizing discord. And his
confusion of thought had become such that, were he asked why he was in
Simiti, he could scarcely have told. At length he dropped into a
feverish sleep.

The day drew to a close, and the flaming sun rested for a brief moment
on the lofty tip of Tolima. Jose awoke, dripping with perspiration,
his steaming blood rushing wildly through its throbbing channels.
Blindly he rose from his rough bed and stumbled out of the stifling
chamber. The living room was deserted. Who might be in the kitchen, he
did not stop to see. Dazed by the garish light and fierce heat, he
rushed from the house and over the burning shales toward the lake.

What he intended to do, he knew not. His weltering thought held but a
single concept--water! The lake would cool his burning skin--he would
wade out into it until it rose to his cracking lips--he would lie down
in it, till it quenched the fire in his head--he would sleep in it--he
would never leave it--it was cool--perhaps cold! What did the word
mean? Was there aught in the world but fire--flames--fierce,
withering, smothering, consuming heat? He thought the shales crackled
as they melted beneath him! He thought his feet sank to the ankles in
molten lava, and were so heavy he scarce could drag them! He thought
the blazing sun shot out great tongues of flame, like the arms of a
monster devilfish, which twined about him, transforming his blood to
vapor and sucking it out through his gaping pores!

A blinding light flashed before him as he reached the margin of the
lake. The universe burst into a ball of fire. He clasped his head in
his hands--stumbled--and fell, face down, in the tepid waters.




CHAPTER 2


"It was the little Carmen, Padre, who saw you run to the lake. She was
sitting at the kitchen door, studying her writing lesson."

The priest essayed to rise from his bed. Night had fallen, and the
feeble light of the candle cast heavy shadows over the room, and made
grotesque pictures of the black, anxious faces looking in at the
grated window.

"But, Rosendo, it--was--a dream--a terrible dream!"

"_Na_, Padre, it was true, for I myself took you from the lake,"
replied Rosendo tenderly.

Jose struggled to a sitting posture, but would have fallen back again
had not Rosendo's strong arm supported him. He passed his hand slowly
across his forehead, as if to brush the mental cobwebs from his
awakening brain. Then he inquired feebly:

"What does the doctor say?"

"Padre, there is no doctor in Simiti," Rosendo answered quietly.

"No doctor!"

Jose kept silence for a few moments. Then--

"But perhaps I do not need one. What time did it occur?"

"It did not happen to-day, Padre," said Rosendo with pitying
compassion. "It was nearly a week ago."

"Nearly a week! And have I lain here so long?"

"Yes, Padre."

The priest stared at him uncomprehendingly. Then--

"The dreams were frightful! I must have talked--raved! Rosendo--you
heard me--?" His voice betrayed anxiety.

"There, Padre, think no more about it. You were wild--I fought to keep
you in bed--we thought you must die--all but Carmen--but you have your
senses now--and you must forget the past."

Forget the past! Then his wild delirium had laid bare his soul! And
the man who had so faithfully nursed him through the crisis now
possessed the sordid details of this wretched life!

Jose struggled to orient his undirected mind. A hot wave of anger
swept over him at the thought that he was still living, that his
battered soul had not torn itself from earth during his delirium and
taken flight. Was he fated to live forever, to drag out an endless
existence, with his heart written upon his sleeve for the world to
read and turn to its own advantage? Rosendo had stood between him and
death--but to what end? Had he not yet paid the score in full--good
measure, pressed down and running over? His thoughts ran rapidly from
one topic to another. Again they reverted to the little girl. He had
dreamed of her in that week of black night. He wondered if he had also
talked of her. He had lain at death's door--Rosendo had said so--but
he had had no physician. Perhaps these simple folk brewed their own
homely remedies--he wondered what they had employed in his case. Above
the welter of his thoughts this question pressed for answer.

"What medicine did you give me, Rosendo?" he feebly queried.

"None, Padre."

Jose's voice rose querulously in a little excess of excitement. "What!
You left me here without medical aid, to live or die, as might be?"

The gentle Rosendo laid a soothing hand upon the priest's feverish
brow. "_Na_, Padre,"--there was a hurt tone in the soft answer--"we
did all we could for you. We have neither doctors nor medicines. But
we cared for you--and we prayed daily for your recovery. The little
Carmen said our prayers would be answered--and, you see, they were."

Again the child!

"And what had she to do with my recovery?" Jose demanded fretfully.

"_Quien sabe?_ It is sometimes that way when the little Carmen says
people shall not die. And then," he added sadly, "sometimes they do
die just the same. It is strange; we do not understand it." The gentle
soul sighed its perplexity.

Jose looked up at him keenly. "Did the child say I should not die?" he
asked softly, almost in a whisper.

"Yes, Padre; she says God's children do not die," returned Rosendo.

The priest's blood stopped in its mad surge and slowly began to chill.
God's children do not die! What uncanny influence had he met with here
in this crumbling, forgotten town? He sought the index of his memory
for the sensations he had felt when he looked into the girl's eyes on
his first morning in Simiti. But memory reported back only impressions
of goodness--beauty--love.

Then a dim light--only a feeble gleam--seemed to flash before him, but
at a great distance. Something called him--not by name, but by again
touching that unfamiliar chord which had vibrated in his soul when the
child had first stood before him. He felt a strange psychic
presentiment as of things soon to be revealed. A sentiment akin to awe
stole over him, as if he were standing in the presence of a great
mystery--a mystery so transcendental that the groveling minds of
mortals have never apprehended it. He turned again to the man sitting
beside his bed.

"Rosendo--where is she?"

"Asleep, Padre," pointing to the other bed. "But we must not wake
her," he admonished quickly, as the priest again sought to rise; "we
will talk of her to-morrow. I think--"

Rosendo stopped abruptly and looked at the priest as if he would
fathom the inmost nature of the man. Then he continued uncertainly:

"I--I may have some things to say to you to-morrow--if you are
well enough to hear them. But I will think about it to-night,
and--if--_Bien_! I will think about it."

Rosendo rose slowly, as if weighted with heavy thoughts, and went out
into the living room. Presently he returned with a rude, homemade
broom and began to sweep a space on the dirt floor in the corner
opposite Jose. This done, he spread out a light straw mat for his
bed.

"The senora is preparing you a bowl of chicken broth and rice, Padre,"
he said. "The little Carmen saved a hen for you when you should awake.
She has fed it all the week on rice and goat's milk. She said she knew
you would wake up hungry."

Jose's eyes had closely followed Rosendo's movements, although he
seemed not to hear his words. Suddenly he broke forth in protest.

"Rosendo," he cried, "have I your bed? And do you sleep there on the
floor? I cannot permit this!"

"Say nothing, Padre," replied Rosendo, gently forcing Jose back again
upon his bed. "My house is yours."

"But--the senora, your wife--where does she sleep?"

"She has her _petate_ in the kitchen," was the quiet answer.

Only the two poor beds, which were occupied by the priest and the
child! And Rosendo and his good wife had slept on the hard dirt floor
for a week! Jose's eyes dimmed when he realized the extent of their
unselfish hospitality. And would they continue to sleep thus on the
ground, with nothing beneath them but a thin straw mat, as long as he
might choose to remain with them? Aye, he knew that they would,
uncomplainingly. For these are the children of the "valley of the
pleasant 'yes.'"

Jose awoke the next morning with a song echoing in his ears. He had
dreamed of singing; and as consciousness slowly returned, the
dream-song became real. It floated in from the living room on a clear,
sweet soprano. When a child he had heard such voices in the choir loft
of the great Seville cathedral, and he had thought that angels were
singing. As he lay now listening to it, memories of his childish
dreams swept over him in great waves. The soft, sweet cadences rose
and fell. His own heart swelled and pulsated with them, and his barren
soul once more surged under the impulse of a deep, potential desire to
manifest itself, its true self, unhampered at last by limitation and
convention, unfettered by superstition, human creeds and false
ambition. Then the inevitable reaction set in; a sickening sense of
the futility of his longing settled over him, and he turned his face
to the wall, while hot tears streamed over his sunken cheeks.

Again through his wearied brain echoed the familiar admonition,
"Occupy till I come." Always the same invariable response to his
strained yearnings. The sweet voice in the adjoining room floated in
through the dusty palm door. It spread over his perturbed thought like
oil on troubled waters. Perhaps it was the child singing. At this
thought the sense of awe seemed to settle upon him again. A child--a
babe--had said that he should live! If a doctor had said it he would
have believed. But a child--absurd! It was a dream! But no; Rosendo
had said it; and there was no reason to doubt him. But what had this
child to do with it? Nothing! And yet--was that wholly true? Then
whence his sensations when first he saw her? Whence that feeling of
standing in the presence of a great mystery? "Out of the mouths of
babes and sucklings--" Foolishness! To be sure, the child may have
said he should not die; but if he were to live--which God forbid!--his
own recuperative powers would restore him. Rosendo's lively
imagination certainly had exaggerated the incident.

Exhausted by his mental efforts, and lulled by the low singing, the
priest sank into fitful slumber. As he slept he dreamed. He was
standing alone in a great desert. Darkness encompassed him, and a
fearful loneliness froze his soul. About him lay bleaching bones.
Neither trees nor vegetation broke the dull monotony of the cheerless
scene. Nothing but waste, unutterably dreary waste, over which a chill
wind tossed the tinkling sand in fitful gusts. In terror he cried
aloud. The desert mocked his hollow cry. The darkness thickened. Again
he called, his heart sinking with despair.

Then, over the desolate waste, through the heavy gloom, a voice seemed
borne faint on the cold air, "Occupy till I come!" He sank to his
knees. His straining eyes caught the feeble glint of a light, but at
an immeasurable distance. Again he called; and again the same
response, but nearer. A glow began to suffuse the blackness about him.
Nearer, ever nearer drew the gleam. The darkness lifted. The rocks
began to bud. Trees and vines sprang from the waste sand. As if in a
tremendous explosion, a dazzling light burst full upon him, shattering
the darkness, fusing the stones about him, and blinding his sight. A
great presence stood before him. He struggled to his feet; and as he
did so a loud voice cried, "Behold, I come _quickly_!"

"_Senor Padre_, you have been dreaming!"

The priest, sitting upright and clutching at the rough sides of his
bed, stared with wooden obliviousness into the face of the little
Carmen.




CHAPTER 3


"You are well now, aren't you, Padre?"

It was not so much an interrogation as an affirmation, an assumption
of fact.

"Now you must come and see my garden--and Cucumbra, too. And
Cantar-las-horas; have you heard him? I scolded him lots; and I know
he wants to mind; but he just thinks he can't stop singing the
Vespers--the old stupid!"

While the child prattled she drew a chair to the bedside and arranged
the bowl of broth and the two wheat rolls she had brought.

"You are real hungry, and you are going to eat all of this and get
strong again. Right away!" she added, emphatically expressing her
confidence in the assumption.

Jose made no reply. He seemed again to be trying to sound the
unfathomable depths of the child's brown eyes. Mechanically he took
the spoon she handed him.

"See!" she exclaimed, while her eyes danced. "A silver spoon! Madre
Ariza borrowed it from Dona Maria Alcozer. They have lots of silver.
Now eat."

From his own great egoism, his years of heart-ache, sorrows, and
shames, the priest's heavy thought slowly lifted and centered upon the
child's beautiful face. The animated little figure before him radiated
such abundant life that he himself caught the infection; and with it
his sense of weakness passed like an illusion.

"And look, Padre! The broth--isn't it good?"

Jose tasted, and declared it delicious.

"Well, you know"--the enthusiastic little maid clambered up on the
bed--"yesterday it was Manuela--she was my hen. I told her a week ago
that you would need her--"

"And you gave up your hen for me, little one?" he interrupted.

"Why--yes, Padre. It was all right. I told her how it was. And she
clucked so hard, I knew she was glad to help the good _Cura_. And she
was so happy about it! I told her she really wouldn't die. You know,
things never do--do they?"

The priest hesitated. To hide his confusion and gain time he began to
eat rapidly.

"No, they don't," said the girl confidently, answering her own
question. "Because," she added, "God is _everywhere_--isn't He?"

What manner of answer could he, of all men, make to such terribly
direct questions as these! And it was well that Carmen evidently
expected none--that in her great innocence she assumed for him the
same beautiful faith which she herself held.

"Dona Jacinta didn't die last week. But they said she did; and so they
took her to the cemetery and put her in a dark _boveda_. And the black
buzzards sat on the wall and watched them. Padre Rosendo said she had
gone to the angels--that God took her. But, Padre, God doesn't make
people sick, does He? They get sick because they don't know who He is.
Every day I told God I knew He would cure you. And He did, didn't
He?"

While the girl paused for breath, her eyes sparkled, and her face
glowed with exaltation. Child-like, her active mind flew from one
topic to another, with no thought of connecting links.

"This morning, Padre, two little green parrots flew across the lake
and perched on our roof. And they sat there and watched Cucumbra eat
his breakfast; and they tried to steal his fish; and they scolded so
loud! Why did they want to steal from him, when there is so much to
eat everywhere? But they didn't know any better, did they? I don't
think parrots love each other very much, for they scold so hard.
Padre, it is so dark in here; come out and see the sun and the lake
and the mountains. And my garden--Padre, it is beautiful! Esteban said
next time he went up the trail he would bring me a monkey for a pet;
and I am going to name it Hombrecito. And Captain Julio is going to
bring me a doll from down the river. But," with a merry, musical
trill, "Juan said the night you came that _you_ were my doll! Isn't he
funny!" And throwing back her little head, the child laughed
heartily.

"Padre, you must help padre Rosendo with his arithmetic. Every night
he puts on his big spectacles and works so hard to understand it. He
says he knows Satan made fractions. But, Padre, that isn't so, is it?
Not if God made everything. Padre, you know _everything_, don't you?
Padre Rosendo said you did. There are lots of things I want you to
tell me--such lots of things that nobody here knows anything about.
Padre,"--the child leaned toward the priest and whispered low--"the
people here don't know who God is; and you are going to teach them!
There was a _Cura_ here once, when I was a baby; but I guess he didn't
know God, either."

She lapsed into silence, as if pondering this thought. Then, clapping
her hands with unfeigned joy, she cried in a shrill little voice, "Oh,
Padre, I am _so_ glad you have come to Simiti! I just _knew_ God would
not forget us!"

Jose had no reply to make. His thought was busy with the phenomenon
before him: a child of man, but one who, like Israel of old, saw God
and heard His voice at every turn of her daily walk. Untutored in the
ways of men, without trace of sophistication or cant, unblemished as
she moved among the soiled vessels about her, shining with celestial
radiance in this unknown, moldering town so far from the world's
beaten paths.

The door opened softly and Rosendo entered, preceded by a cheery
greeting.

_"Hombre!_" he exclaimed, surveying the priest, "but you mend fast!
You have eaten all the broth! But I told the good wife that the little
Carmen would be better than medicine for you, and that you must have
her just as soon as you should awake."

Jose's eyes dilated with astonishment. Absorbed in the child, he had
consumed almost his entire breakfast.

"He is well, padre Rosendo, he is well!" cried the girl, bounding up
and down and dancing about the tall form of her foster-father. Then,
darting to Jose, she seized his hand and cried, "Now to see my garden!
And Cucumbra! And--!"

"Quiet, child!" commanded Rosendo, taking her by the arm. "The good
_Cura_ is ill, and must rest for several days yet."

"No, padre Rosendo, he is well--all well! Aren't you, Padre?"
appealing to Jose, and again urging him forth.

The rapidity of the conversation and the animation of the beautiful
child caused complete forgetfulness of self, and, together with the
restorative effect of the wholesome food, acted upon the priest like a
magical tonic. Weak though he was, he clung to her hand and,
struggling out of the bed, stood uncertainly upon the floor. Instantly
Rosendo's arm was about him.

"Don't try it, Padre," the latter urged anxiously. "The heat will be
too much for you. Another day or two of rest will make you right."

But the priest, heedless of the admonition, suffered himself to be led
by the child; and together they passed slowly out into the living
room, through the kitchen, and thence into the diminutive rose garden,
the pride of the little Carmen.

Dona Maria, wife of Rosendo, was bending over the primitive fireplace,
busy with her matutinal duties, having just dusted the ashes from a
corn _arepa_ which she had prepared for her consort's simple luncheon.
She was a woman well into the autumn of life; but her form possessed
something of the elegance of the Spanish dames of the colonial period;
her countenance bore an expression of benevolence, which emanated
from a gentle and affectionate heart; and her manner combined both
dignity and suavity. She greeted the priest tenderly, and expressed
mingled surprise and joy that he felt able to leave his bed so soon.
But as her eyes caught Rosendo's meaning glance, and then turned to
the child, they seemed to indicate a full comprehension of the
situation.

The rose garden consisted of a few square feet of black earth,
bordered by bits of shale, and seemingly scarce able to furnish
nourishment for the three or four little bushes. But, though small,
these were blooming in profusion.

"Padre Rosendo did this!" exclaimed the delighted girl. "Every night
he brings water from _La Cienaga_ for them!"

Rosendo smiled patronizingly upon the child; but Jose saw in the
glance of his argus eyes a tenderness and depth of affection for her
which bespoke nothing short of adoration.

Carmen bent over the roses, fondling and kissing them, and addressing
them endearing names.

"She calls them God's kisses," whispered Rosendo to the priest.

At that moment a low growl was heard. Jose turned quickly and
confronted a gaunt dog, a wild breed, with eyes fixed upon the priest
and white fangs showing menacingly beneath a curling lip.

"Oh, Cucumbra!" cried the child, rushing to the beast and throwing her
arms about its shaggy neck. "Haven't I told you to love everybody? And
is that the way to show it? Now kiss the _Cura's_ hand, for he loves
you."

The brute sank at her feet. Then as she took the priest's hand and
held it to the dog's mouth, he licked it with his rough tongue.

The priest's brain was now awhirl. He stood gazing at the child as if
fascinated. Through his jumbled thought there ran an insistent strain,
"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father. The Father dwelleth in me
and I in Him." He did not associate these words with the Nazarene now,
but with the barefoot girl before him. Again within the farthest
depths of his soul he heard the soft note of a vibrating chord--that
chord which all the years of his unhappy life had hung mute, until
here, in this moldering town, in the wilderness of forgotten Guamoco,
the hand of Love had swept it.

The sun stood at the zenith. The day was white-hot. Dona Maria
summoned her little family to the midday repast. Rosendo brought a
chair for Jose and placed it near the rose garden in the shade of the
house, for, despite all protest, the priest had stubbornly refused to
return to his bed. Left now to himself, his thought hovered about the
child, and then drifted out across the incandescent shales to the
beautiful lake beyond. The water lay like shimmering glass. In the
distance the wooded <DW72>s of the San Lucas mountains rose like green
billows. Brooding silence spread over the scene. It was Nature's hour
of _siesta_. In his own heart there was a great peace--and a strange
expectancy. He seemed to be awaiting a revelation of things close at
hand. In a way he felt that he had accomplished his purpose of coming
to Simiti to die, and that he was now awaiting the resurrection.

The peaceful revery was interrupted by Rosendo. "Padre, if you will
not return to your bed--" He regarded the priest dubiously.

"No, Rosendo. I grow stronger every minute. But--where is Carmen?"

"She must help her mother."

A long pause ensued, while Jose impatiently waited for Rosendo to
continue. The child was becoming his obsession. He was eager to talk
of her, to learn her history, to see her, for her presence meant
complete obliteration of self.

"Padre," Rosendo at length emerged from his meditation. "I would like
to speak of the little Carmen."

"Yes," responded Jose with animation. Life and strength seemed to
return to him with a bound.

"But--what say you? Shall we visit the church, which is only across
the road? There we can talk without interruption. No one will be in
the streets during the heat. And I will carry you over."

"Let us go to the church, yes; but I can walk. It is only a step."

Jose leaned upon Rosendo, the latter supporting him with his great
arm, and together they crossed the road and mounted the shale platform
on which stood the ancient edifice. Rosendo produced a huge key of
antique pattern; and the rusty lock, after much resistance, yielded
with a groan, and the heavy door creaked open, emitting an odor of
dampness and must. Doffing their hats, the men entered the long,
barn-like room. Rosendo carefully closed and locked the door behind
them, a precaution necessary in a drowsing town of this nature, where
the simple folk who see day after day pass without concern or event to
break the deadening monotony, assemble in eager, buzzing multitudes at
the slightest prospect of extraordinary interest.

The room was dimly lighted, and was open to the peak of the roof. From
the rough-hewn rafters above hung hundreds of hideous bats. At the far
end stood the altar. It was adorned with decrepit images, and held a
large wooden statue of the Virgin. This latter object was veiled with
two flimsy curtains, which were designed to be raised and lowered with
great pomp and the ringing of a little bell during service. The image
was attired in real clothes, covered with tawdry finery, gilt paper,
and faded ribbons. The head bore a wig of hair; and the face was
painted, although great sections of the paint had fallen, away,
leaving the suggestion of pockmarks. Beneath this image was located
the _sagrario_, the little cupboard in which the _hostia_, the sacred
wafer, was wont to be kept exposed in the _custodia_, a cheap
receptacle composed of two watch crystals. At either side of this
stood half consumed wax tapers. A few rough benches were strewn about
the floor; and dust and green mold lay thick over all.

At the far right-hand corner of the building a lean-to had been
erected to serve as the _sacristia_, or vestry. In the worm-eaten
wardrobe within hung a few vestments, adorned with cheap finery, and
heavily laden with dust, over which scampered vermin of many
varieties. An air of desolation and abandon hung over the whole
church, and to Jose seemed to symbolize the decay of a sterile faith.

Rosendo carefully dusted off a bench near one of the windows and bade
Jose be seated.

"_Padre_," he began, after some moments of deep reflection, "the
little Carmen is not an ordinary child."

"I have seen that, Rosendo," interposed Jose.

"We--we do not understand her," Rosendo went on, carefully weighing
his words; "and we sometimes think she is not--not altogether like
us--that her coming was a miracle. But you do not believe in
miracles," he added quizzically.

"Why do you say that, Rosendo?" Jose returned in surprise.

Rosendo paused before replying.

"You were very sick, Padre; and in the fever you--" the impeccably
honest fellow hesitated.

"Yes, I thought so," said Jose with an air of weary resignation. "And
what else did I say, Rosendo?"

The faultless courtesy of the artless Rosendo, a courtesy so genuine
that Jose knew it came right from the heart, made conversation on this
topic a matter of extreme difficulty to him.

"Do not be uneasy, Padre," he said reassuringly. "I alone heard you.
Whenever you began to talk I would not let others listen; and I stayed
with you every day and night. But--it is just because of what you said
in the _calentura_ that I am speaking to you now of the little
Carmen."

Because of what he had said in his delirium! Jose's astonishment grew
apace.

"Padre, many bad priests have been sent to Simiti. It has been our
curse. Priests who stirred up revolution elsewhere, who committed
murder, and ruined the lives of fair women, have been put upon us. And
when in Badillo I learned that you had been sent to our parish, I was
filled with fear. I--I lost a daughter, Padre--"

The good man hesitated again. Then, as a look of stern resolution
spread over his strong, dark face, he continued:

"It was Padre Diego! We drove him out of Simiti four years ago. But my
daughter, my only child, went with him." The great frame shook with
emotion, while he hurried on disconnectedly.

"Padre, the priest Diego said that the little Carmen should become a
Sister--a nun--that she must be sent to the convent in Mompox--that
she belonged to the Church, and the Church would some day have her.
But, by the Holy Virgin, the Church shall _not_ have her! And I myself
will slay her before this altar rather than let such as Padre Diego
lay their slimy paws upon the angel child!"

Rosendo leaped to his feet and began to pace the floor with great
strides. The marvelous frame of the man, in which beat a heart too big
for the sordid passions of the flesh, trembled as he walked. Jose
watched him in mute admiration, mingled with astonishment and a
heightened sense of expectancy. Presently Rosendo returned and seated
himself again beside the priest.

"Padre, I have lived in terror ever since Diego left Simiti. For
myself I do not fear, for if ever I meet with the wretch I shall wring
his neck with my naked hands! But--for the little Carmen--_Dios!_ they
might steal her at any time! There are men here who would do it for a
few _pesos_! And how could I prevent it? I pray daily to the Virgin to
protect her. She--she is the light of my life. I watch over her
hourly. I neglect my _hacienda_, that I may guard her--and I am a poor
man, and cannot afford not to work."

The man buried his face in his huge hands and groaned aloud. Jose
remained pityingly silent, knowing that Rosendo's heaving heart must
empty itself.

"Padre," Rosendo at length raised his head. His features were drawn,
but his eyes glowed fiercely. "Priests have committed dark deeds here,
and this altar has dripped with blood. When a child, with my own eyes
I saw a priest elevate the Host before this altar, as the people knelt
in adoration. While their heads were bowed I saw him drive a knife
into the neck of a man who was his enemy; and the blood spurted over
the image of the Virgin and fell upon the Sacred Host itself! And
what did the wicked priest say in defense? Simply that he took this
time to assassinate his man because then the victim could die adoring
the Host and under the most favorable circumstances for salvation!
_Hombre!_ And did the priest pay the penalty for his crime? No! The
Bishop of Cartagena transferred him to another parish, and told him to
do better in future!"

Jose started in horror. But Rosendo did not stop.

"And I remember the story my father used to tell of the priest who
poisoned a whole family in Simiti with the communion wafer. Their
estates had been willed to the Church, and he was impatient to have
the management of them. Again nothing was done about it."

"But, Rosendo, if Simiti has been so afflicted by bad priests, why are
you confiding in me?" Jose asked in wonder.

"Because, Padre," Rosendo replied, "in the fever you said many things
that made me think you were not a bad man. I did suspect you at
first--but not after I heard you talk in your sleep. You, too, have
suffered. And the Church has caused it. No, not God; but the men who
say they know what He thinks and says. They make us all suffer. And
after I heard you tell those things in your fever-sleep, I said to
Maria that if you lived I knew you would help me protect the little
Carmen. Then, too, you are a--" He lapsed abruptly into silence.

Jose pressed Rosendo's hand. "Tell me about her. You have said she is
not your daughter. I ask only because of sincere affection for you
all, and because the child has aroused in me an unwonted interest."

Rosendo looked steadily into the eyes of the priest for some moments.
Jose as steadily returned the glance. From the eyes of the one there
emanated a soul-searching scrutiny; from those of the other an
answering bid for confidence. The bid was accepted.

"Padre," began Rosendo, "I place trust in you. Something makes me
believe that you are not like other priests I have known. And I have
seen that you already love the little Carmen. No, she is not my child.
One day, about eight years ago, a steamer on its way down the river
touched at Badillo to put off a young woman, who was so sick that the
captain feared she would die on board. He knew nothing of her, except
that she had embarked at Honda and was bound for Barranquilla. He
hoped that by leaving her in the care of the good people of Badillo
something might be done. The boat went its way; and the next morning
the woman died, shortly after her babe was born. They buried her back
of the village, and Escolastico's woman took the child. They tried to
learn the history of the mother; but, though the captain of the boat
made many inquiries, he could only find that she had come from Bogota
the day before the boat left Honda, and that she was then very sick.
Some weeks afterward Escolastico happened to come to Simiti, and told
me the story. He complained that his family was already large, and
that his woman found the care of the babe a burden. I love children,
Padre, and it seemed to me that I could find a place for the little
one, and I told him I would fetch her. And so a few days later I
brought her to Simiti. But before leaving Badillo I fixed a wooden
cross over the mother's grave and wrote on it in pencil the name
'_Dolores_,' for that was the name in the little gold locket which we
found in her valise. There were some clothes, better than the average,
and the locket. In the locket were two small pictures, one of a young
man, with the name '_Guillermo_' written beneath it, and one of the
woman, with '_Dolores_' under it. That was all. Captain Julio took the
locket to Honda when he made inquiries there; but brought it back
again, saying that nobody recognized the faces. I named the babe
Carmen, and have brought her up as my own child. She--Padre, I adore
her!"

Jose listened in breathless silence.

"But we sometimes think," said Rosendo, resuming his dramatic
narrative, "that it was all a miracle, perhaps a dream; that it was
the angels who left the babe on the river bank, for she herself is not
of the earth."

"Tell me, Rosendo, just what you mean," said Jose reverently, laying
his hand gently upon the older man's arm.

Rosendo shook his head slowly. "Talk with her, Padre, and you will
see. I cannot explain. Only, she is not like us. She is like--"

His voice dropped to a whisper.

"--she is like--God. And she knows Him better than she knows me."

Jose's head slowly sank upon his breast. The gloom within the musty
church was thick; and the bats stirred restlessly among the dusty
rafters overhead. Outside, the relentless heat poured down upon the
deserted streets.

"Padre," Rosendo resumed. "In the _calentura_ you talked of wonderful
things. You spoke of kings and popes and foreign lands, of beautiful
cities and great marvels of which we know nothing. It was wonderful!
And you recited beautiful poems--but often in other tongues than ours.
Padre, you must be very learned. I listened, and was astonished, for
we are so ignorant here in Simiti, oh, so ignorant! We have no
schools, and our poor little children grow up to be only _peones_ and
fishermen. But--the little Carmen--ah, she has a mind! Padre--"

Again he lapsed into silence, as if fearful to ask the boon.

"Yes, Rosendo, yes," Jose eagerly reassured him. "Go on."

Rosendo turned full upon the priest and spoke rapidly. "Padre, will
you teach the little Carmen what you know? Will you make her a strong,
learned woman, and fit her to do big things in the world--and
then--then--"

"Yes, Rosendo?"

"--then get her away from Simiti? She does not belong here, Padre.
And--?" his voice sank to a hoarse whisper--"will you help me keep her
from the Church?"

Jose sat staring at the man with dilating eyes.

"Padre, she has her own Church. It is her heart."

He leaned over and laid a hand upon the priest's knee. His dark eyes
seemed to burn like glowing coals. His whispered words were fraught
with a meaning which Jose would some day learn.

"Padre, _that_ must be left alone!"

A long silence fell upon the two men, the one massive of frame and
black of face, but with a mind as simple as a child's and a heart as
white as the snow that sprinkled his raven locks--the other a
youth in years, but bowed with disappointment and suffering; yet now
listening with hushed breath to the words that rolled with a mighty
reverberation through the chambers of his soul:

"I am God, and there is none else! Behold, I come quickly! Arise,
shine, for thy light is come!"

The sweet face of the child rose out of the gloom before the priest.
The years rolled back like a curtain, and he saw himself at her tender
age, a white, unformed soul, awaiting the sculptor's hand. God forbid
that the hand which shaped his career should form the plastic mind of
this girl!

Of a sudden a great thought flashed out of the depths of eternity and
into his brain, a thought which seemed to illumine his whole past
life. In the clear light thereof he seemed instantly to read meanings
in numberless events which to that hour had remained hidden. His
complex, misshapen career--could it have been a preparation?--and for
this? He had yearned to serve his fellow-men, but had miserably
failed. For, while to will was always present with him, even as with
Paul, yet how to perform that which was good he found not. But
now--what an opportunity opened before him! What a beautiful offering
of self was here made possible? God, what a privilege!

Rosendo sat stolid, buried in thought. Jose reached out through the
dim light and grasped his black hand. His eyes were lucent, his heart
burned with the fire of an unknown enthusiasm, and speech stumbled
across his lips.

"Rosendo, I came to Simiti to die. And now I know that I _shall_
die--to myself. But thereby shall I live. Yes, I shall live! And here
before this altar, in the sight of that God whom she knows so well, I
pledge my new-found life to Carmen. My mind, my thought, my strength,
are henceforth hers. May her God direct me in their right use for His
beautiful child!"

Jose and Rosendo rose from the bench with hands still clasped. In that
hour the priest was born again.




CHAPTER 4


"He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it."

The reporters of the unique Man of Galilee, upon whose straining ears
these words fell, noted them for future generations of footsore
pilgrims on life's wandering highway--for the rich, satiated with
their gorgeous gluttonies; for the proud Levite, with his feet
enmeshed in the lifeless letter of the Law; for the loathsome and
outcast beggar at the gates of Dives. And for Jose de Rincon, priest
of the Holy Catholic Church and vicar of Christ, scion of aristocracy
and worldly learning, now humbled and blinded, like Paul on the road
to Damascus, begging that his spiritual sight might be opened to the
glory of the One with whom he had not known how to walk.

Returning in silence from the church to Rosendo's humble cottage, Jose
had asked leave to retire. He would be alone with the great Presence
which had come to him across the desert of his life, and now stood
before him in the brightness of the undimmed sun. He no longer felt
ill nor exhausted. Indeed, quite the contrary; a quickened sense of
life, an eagerness to embrace the opportunity opening before him,
caused his chest to heave and his shrunken veins to throb.

On his bed in the darkened room he lay in a deep silence, broken only
at intervals by the hurried scampering of lizards darting through the
interstices of the dry walls. His uncomprehending eyes were fixed upon
the dust-laden thatch of the roof overhead, where droning wasps toiled
upon their frail abodes. He lay with the portals of his mind opened
wide. Through them, in ceaseless flow, passed two streams which did
not mingle. The one, outward bound, turbid with its burden of egoism,
fear, perplexity, and hopelessness, which, like barnacles, had
fastened to his soul on its chartless voyage; the other, a stream of
hope and confidence and definite purpose, a stream which leaped and
sang in the warm sunlight of Love as it poured into his receptive
brain.

The fresh thought which flowed into his mental chambers rapidly formed
into orderly plans, all centering upon the child, Carmen. What could
he teach her? The relative truths and worldly knowledge--purified,
as far as in him lay, from the dross of speculation and human
opinion--which lay stored in the archives of his mind? Yes; but that
was all. History, and its interpretation of human progress; the
languages; mathematics, and the elements of the physical sciences;
literature; and a knowledge of people and places. With these his
retentive mind was replete. But beyond this he must learn of her.
And her tutor, he now knew, was the Master Mind, omniscient God.
And he knew, more, that she possessed secrets whose potency he might
as yet scarcely imagine. For, in an environment which for dearth of
mental stimulus and incentive could scarcely be matched; amid
poverty but slightly raised above actual want; untouched by the
temperamental hopelessness which lies just beneath the surface of
these dull, simple folk, this child lived a life of such ecstasy as
might well excite the envy of the world's potentates.

But meantime, what should be his attitude toward the parish? He fully
realized that he and the Church were now as far apart as the poles.
Yet this was become his parish, the first he had ever held; and these
were his people. And he must face them and preach--what? If not the
Catholic faith, then would he be speedily removed. And that meant
complete disruption of his rapidly formulating plans. But might he not
in that event flee with Carmen, renounce the Church, and--

Impossible! Excommunication alone could sever the oath by which the
Church held him. And for that he could not say that he was ready. For
excommunication meant disgrace to his mother--perhaps the snapping of
a heart already sorely strained. To renounce his oath was dishonor. To
preach the Catholic faith without sincerity was scarcely less. Yet
amid present circumstances this seemed the only course open to him.

But what must he teach Carmen in regard to the Church? Could he
maintain his position in it, yet not of it; and at the same time rear
her without its pale, yet so as not to conflict with the people of
Simiti, nor cause such comment as might reach the ears of the Bishop
of Cartagena? God alone knew. It must be attempted, at any rate. There
was no other way. And if it was God's plan, he might safely trust Him
for the requisite strength and wisdom. For this course the isolation
of Simiti and the childish simplicity of its people afforded a
tremendous advantage. On the other hand, he knew that both he and
Carmen had powerful enemies. Yet, one with God might rout a host. And
Carmen walked with God.

Thus throughout the afternoon the priest weighed and pondered the
thoughts that sought admission to his reawakened mind. He was not
interrupted until sundown; and then Carmen entered the room with a
bowl of chocolate and some small wheaten loaves. Behind her, with an
amusing show of dignity, stalked a large heron, an elegant bird, with
long, scarlet legs, gray plumage, and a gracefully curved neck. When
the bird reached the threshold it stopped, and without warning gave
vent to a prolonged series of shrill, unmusical sounds. The startled
priest sat up in his bed and exclaimed in amazement.

"It is only Cantar-las-horas, Padre," laughed the little maid. "He
follows me wherever I go, unless he is off fishing. Sometimes when I
go out in the boat with padre Rosendo he flies clear across the lake
to meet us. He is lots older than I, and years ago, when there were
_Curas_ here, he learned his song. Whenever the _Angelas_ rang he
would try to sing just like it; and now he has the habit and can't
help it. But he is such a dear, wise old fellow," twining a chubby arm
lovingly about the bird's slender neck; "and he always sings just at
six o'clock, the time the _Angelas_ used to ring."

The heron manifested the deepest affection for the child as she gently
stroked its plumage and caressed its long, pointed bill.

"But how do you suppose he knows when it is just six o'clock,
_chiquita_?" asked Jose, deeply interested in the strange phenomenon.

"God tells him, Padre," was the direct and simple reply.

Assuredly, he should have known that! But he was fast learning of this
unusual child, whose every movement was a demonstration of Immanuel.

"Does God tell you what to do, Carmen?" he asked, seeking to draw out
the girl's strange thought, that he might probe deeper into her
religious convictions.

"Why, yes, Padre." Her tone expressed surprise. "Doesn't He tell you,
too?" Her great eyes searched him. He was a _Cura_; he should be very
close to God.

"Yes, _chiquita_--that is, He has told me to-day what to do."

There was a shade of disappointment in her voice when she replied: "I
guess you mean you listened to Him to-day, don't you, Padre? I think
sometimes you don't want to hear Him. But," she finished with a little
sigh, "there are lots of people here who don't; and that is why they
are sick and unhappy."

Jose was learning another lesson, that of guarding his speech to this
ingenuous girl. He discreetly changed the subject.

"What have you been doing this afternoon, little one?"

Her eyes instantly brightened, and the dark shade that had crossed her
face disappeared.

"Well, after the _siesta_ I helped madre Maria clean the yuccas for
supper; and then I did my writing lesson. Padre Rosendo told me to-day
that I could write better than he. But, Padre, will you teach madre
Maria to read and write? And there are just lots of poor people here
who can't, too. There is a school teacher in Simiti, but he charges a
whole _peso oro_ a month for teaching; and the people haven't the
money, and so they can't learn."

Always the child shifted his thought from herself to others. Again she
showed him that the road to happiness wound among the needs of his
fellow-men. The priest mentally recorded the instruction; and the girl
continued:

"Padre Rosendo told madre Maria that you said you had come to Simiti
to die. You were not thinking of us then, were you, Padre? People who
think only of themselves always want to die. That was why Don Luis
died last year. He had lots of gold, and he always wanted more, and he
was cruel and selfish, and he couldn't talk about anything but himself
and how rich he was--and so he died. He didn't really die; but he
thought about himself until he thought he died. And so they buried
him. That's what always happens to people who think about themselves
all the time--they get buried."

Jose was glad of the silence that fell upon them. Wrapped so long in
his own egoism, he had now no worldly wisdom with which to match this
girl's sapient words. He waited. He felt that Carmen was but the
channel through which a great Voice was speaking.

"Padre," the tones were tender and soft, "you don't always think of
good things, do you?"

"I? Why, no, little girl. I guess I haven't done so. That is, not
always. But--"

"Because if you had you wouldn't have been driven into the lake that
day. And you wouldn't be here now in Simiti."

"But, child, even a _Cura_ cannot always think of good things, when he
sees so much wickedness in the world!"

"But, Padre, God is good, isn't He?"

"Yes, child." The necessity to answer could not be avoided.

"And He is everywhere?"

"Yes." He had to say it.

"Then where is the wickedness, Padre?"

"Why--but, _chiquita_, you don't understand; you are too young to
reason about such things; and--"

In his heart Jose knew he spoke not the truth. He felt the great
brown eyes of the girl penetrate his naked soul; and he knew that in
the dark recesses of the inner man they fell upon the grinning
skeleton of hypocrisy. Carmen might be, doubtless was, incapable of
reasoning. Of logical processes she knew nothing. But by what crass
assumption might he, admittedly woefully defeated in his combat with
Fate, oppose his feeble shafts of worldly logic to this child's
instinct, an instinct of whose inerrancy her daily walk was a living
demonstration? In quick penitence and humility he stretched out his
arm and drew her unresisting to him.

"Dear little child of God," he murmured, as he bent over her and
touched his lips to her rich brown curls, "I have tried my life long
to learn what you already know. And at last I have been led to you--to
you, little one, who shall be a lamp unto my feet. Dearest child, I
want to know your God as you know Him. I want you to lead me to Him,
for you know where He is."

"He is _everywhere_, Padre dear," whispered the child, as she
nestled close to the priest and stole her soft arms gently about his
neck. "But we don't see Him nor hear Him if we have bad thoughts, and
if we don't love everybody and everything, even Cucumbra, and
Cantar-las-horas, and--"

"Yes, _chiquita_, I know now," interrupted Jose. "I don't wonder they
all love you."

"But, Padre dear, I love them--and I love you."

The priest strained her to him. His famished heart yearned for love.
Love! first of the tender graces which adorned this beautiful child.
Verily, only those imbued with it become the real teachers of men. The
beloved disciple's last instruction to his dear children was the
tender admonition to love one another. But why, oh, why are we bidden
to love the fallen, sordid outcasts of this wicked world--the
wretched, sinning pariahs--the greedy, grasping, self-centered mass of
humanity that surges about us in such woeful confusion of good and
evil? Because the wise Master did. Because he said that God was Love.
Because he taught that he who loves not, knows not God. And because,
oh, wonderful spiritual alchemy! because Love is the magical potion
which, dropping like heavenly dew upon sinful humanity, dissolves the
vice, the sorrow, the carnal passions, and transmutes the brutish
mortal into the image and likeness of the perfect God.

Far into the night, while the child slept peacefully in the bed near
him, Jose lay thinking of her and of the sharp turn which she had
given to the direction of his life. Through the warm night air the
hoarse croaking of distant frogs and the mournful note of the toucan
floated to his ears. In the street without he heard at intervals the
pattering of bare feet in the hot, thick dust, as tardy fishermen
returned from their labors. The hum of insects about his _toldo_
lulled him with its low monotone. The call of a lonely jaguar drifted
across the still lake from the brooding jungle beyond. A great peace
lay over the ancient town; and when, in the early hours of morning, as
the distorted moon hung low in the western sky, Jose awoke, the soft
breathing of the child fell upon his ears like a benediction; and deep
from his heart there welled a prayer--

"My God--_her_ God--at last I thank Thee!"




CHAPTER 5


The day following was filled to the brim with bustling activity. Jose
plunged into his new life with an enthusiasm he had never known
before. His first care was to relieve Rosendo and his good wife of the
burden of housing him. Rosendo, protesting against the intimation that
the priest could in any way inconvenience him, at last suggested that
the house adjoining his own, a small, three-room cottage, was vacant,
and might be had at a nominal rental. Some repairs were needed; the
mud had fallen from the walls in several places; but he would plaster
it up again and put it into habitable condition at once.

During the discussion Don Mario, the Alcalde, called to pay his
respects to Jose. He had just returned from a week's visit to Ocana,
whither he had gone on matters of business with Simiti's most eminent
citizen, Don Felipe Alcozer, who was at present sojourning there for
reasons of health. Learning of the priest's recent severe illness, Don
Mario had hastened at once to pay his _devoirs_. And now the Holy
Virgin be praised that he beheld the _Cura_ again fully restored! Yes,
the dismal little house in question belonged to him, but would the
_Cura_ graciously accept it, rent free, and with his most sincere
compliments? Jose glanced at Rosendo and, reading a meaning in the
slight shake of his head, replied that, although overwhelmed by the
Alcalde's kindness, he could take the cottage only on the condition
that it should become the parish house, which the Church must support.
A shade of disappointment seemed to cross the heavy face of Don Mario,
but he graciously acquiesced in the priest's suggestion; and
arrangements were at once concluded whereby the house became the
dwelling place of the new _Cura_.

Rosendo thereupon sent out a call for assistants, to which the entire
unemployed male population of the town responded. Mud for the walls
was hastily brought from the lake, and mixed with manure and dried
grass. A half dozen young men started for the islands to cut fresh
thatch for the roof. Others set about scraping the hard dirt floors;
while Don Mario gave orders which secured a table, several rough
chairs, together with iron stewpans and a variety of enameled metal
dishes, all of which Rosendo insisted should be charged against the
parish. The village carpenter, with his rusty tools and rough,
undressed lumber, constructed a bed in one of the rooms; and Juan, the
boatman, laboriously sought out stones of the proper shape and size to
support the cooking utensils in the primitive dirt hearth.

Often, as he watched the progress of these arrangements, Jose's
thoughts reverted longingly to his father's comfortable house in
far-off Seville; to his former simple quarters in Rome; and to the
less pretentious, but still wholly sufficient _menage_ of Cartagena.
Compared with this primitive dwelling and the simple husbandry which
it would shelter, his former abodes and manner of life had been
extravagantly luxurious. At times he felt a sudden sinking of heart as
he reflected that perhaps he should never again know anything better
than the lowly life of this dead town. But when his gaze rested upon
the little Carmen, flying hither and yon with an ardent, anticipatory
interest in every detail of the preparations, and when he realized
that, though her feet seemed to rest in the squalid setting afforded
by this dreary place, yet her thought dwelt ever in heaven, his heart
welled again with a great thankfulness for the inestimable privilege
of giving his new life, in whatever environment, to a soul so fair as
hers.

While his house was being set in order under the direction of Rosendo,
Jose visited the church with the Alcalde to formulate plans for its
immediate repair and renovation. As he surveyed the ancient pile and
reflected that it stood as a monument to the inflexible religious
convictions of his own distant progenitors, the priest's sensibilities
were profoundly stirred. How little he knew of that long line of
illustrious ancestry which preceded him! He had been thrust from under
the parental wing at the tender age of twelve; but he could not recall
that even before that event his father had ever made more than casual
mention of the family. Indeed, in the few months since arriving on
ancestral soil Jose had gathered up more of the threads which bound
him to the ancient house of Rincon than in all the years which
preceded. Had he himself only been capable of the unquestioning
acceptance of religious dogma which those old _Conqueros_ and early
forbears exhibited, to what position of eminence in Holy Church might
he not already have attained, with every avenue open to still greater
preferment! How happy were his dear mother then! How glorious their
honored name!--

With a sigh the priest roused himself and strove to thrust these
disturbing thoughts from his mind by centering his attention upon the
work in hand. Dona Maria came to him for permission to take the moldy
vestments from the _sacristia_ to her house to clean them. The
Alcalde, bustling about, panting and perspiring, was distributing
countless orders among his willing assistants. Carmen, who throughout
the morning had been everywhere, bubbling with enthusiasm, now
appeared at the church door. As she entered the musty, ill-smelling
old building she hesitated on the threshold, her childish face screwed
into an expression of disgust.

"Come in, little one; I need your inspiration," called Jose cheerily.

The child approached, and slipped her hand into his. "Padre Rosendo
says this is God's house," she commented, looking up at Jose. "He says
you are going to talk about God here--in this dirty, smelly old place!
Why don't you talk about Him out of doors?"

Jose was becoming innured to the embarrassment which her direct
questions occasioned. And he was learning not to dissemble in his
replies.

"It is because the people want to come here, dear one; it is their
custom."

Would the people believe that the wafer and wine could be changed into
the flesh and blood of Jesus elsewhere--even in Nature's temple?

"But _I_ don't want to come here!" she asseverated.

"That was a naughty thing to say to the good _Cura_, child!"
interposed Don Mario, who had overheard the girl's remark. "You see,
Padre, how we need a _Cura_ here to save these children; otherwise the
Church is going to lose them. They are running pretty wild, and
especially this one. She is already dedicated to the Church; but she
will have to learn to speak more reverently of holy things if she
expects to become a good Sister."

The child looked uncomprehendingly from, one to the other.

"Who dedicated her to the Church?" demanded Jose sharply.

"Oh, Padre Diego, at her baptism, when she was a baby," replied Don
Mario in a matter of fact tone.

Jose shuddered at the thought of that unholy man's loathsome hands
resting upon the innocent girl. But he made no immediate reply. Of
all things, he knew that the guarding of his own tongue was now most
important. But his thought was busy with Rosendo's burning words of
the preceding day, and with his own solemn vow. He reflected on his
present paradoxical, hazardous position; on the tremendous problem
which here confronted him; and on his desperate need of wisdom--yea,
superhuman wisdom--to ward off from this child the net which he knew
the subtlety and cruel cunning of shrewd, unscrupulous men would some
day cause to be cast about her. A soul like hers, mirrored in a body
so wondrous fair, must eventually draw the devil's most envenomed
barbs.

To Jose's great relief Don Mario turned immediately from the present
topic to one relating to the work of renovation. Finding a pretext for
sending Carmen back to the house, the priest gave his attention
unreservedly to the Alcalde. But his mind ceased not to revolve the
implications in Don Mario's words relative to the girl; and when the
midday _siesta_ came upon him his brow was knotted and his eyes gazed
vacantly at the manifestations of activity about him.

Hurrying across the road to escape the scalding heat, Jose's ears
again caught the sound of singing, issuing evidently from Rosendo's
house. It was very like the clear, sweet voice which had floated into
his room the morning after he awoke from his delirium. He approached
the door reverently and looked in. Carmen was arranging the few poor
dishes upon the rough table, and as she worked, her soul flowed across
her lips in song.

The man listened astonished. The words and the simple melody which
carried them were evidently an improvisation. But the voice--did that
issue from a human throat? Yes, for in distant Spain and far-off Rome,
in great cathedrals and concert halls, he had sometimes listened
entranced to voices like this--stronger, and delicately trained, but
reared upon even less of primitive talent.

The girl caught sight of him; and the song died on the warm air.

The priest strode toward her and clasped her in his arms. "Carmen,
child! Who taught you to sing like that?"

The girl smiled up in his face. "God, Padre."

Of course! He should have known. And in future he need never ask.

"And I suppose He tells you when to sing, too, as He does
Cantar-las-horas?" said Jose, smiling in amusement.

"No, Padre," was the unaffected answer. "He just sings Himself in
me."

The man felt rebuked for his light remark; and a lump rose in his
throat. He looked again into her fair face with a deep yearning.

Oh, ye of little faith! Did you but know--could you but realize--that
the kingdom of heaven is within you, would not celestial melody flow
from your lips, too?

Throughout the afternoon, while he labored with his willing helpers in
the church building and his homely cottage, the child's song lingered
in his brain, like the memory of a sweet perfume. His eyes followed
her lithe, graceful form as she flitted about, and his mind was busy
devising pretexts for keeping her near him. At times she would steal
up close to him and put her little hand lovingly and confidingly into
his own. Then as he looked down into her upturned face, wreathed with
smiles of happiness, his breath would catch, and he would turn
hurriedly away, that she might not see the tears which suffused his
eyes.

When night crept down, unheralded, from the _Sierras_, the priest's
house stood ready for its occupant. Cantar-las-horas had dedicated it
by singing the _Angelus_ at the front door, for the hour of six had
overtaken him as he stood, with cocked head, peering curiously within.
The dwelling, though pitifully bare, was nevertheless as clean as
these humble folk with the primitive means at their command could
render it. Instead of the customary hard _macana_ palm strips for the
bed, Rosendo had thoughtfully substituted a large piece of tough white
canvas, fastened to a rectangular frame, which rested on posts well
above the damp floor. On this lay a white sheet and a light blanket of
red flannel. Rosendo had insisted that, for the present, Jose should
take his meals with him. The priest's domestic arrangements,
therefore, would be simple in the extreme; and Dona Maria quietly
announced that these were in her charge. The church edifice would not
be in order for some days yet, perhaps a week. But of this Jose was
secretly glad, for he regarded with dread the necessity of discharging
the priestly functions. And yet, upon that hinged his stay in Simiti.

"Simiti has two churches, you know, Padre," remarked Rosendo during
the evening meal. "There is another old one near the eastern edge of
town. If you wish, we can visit it while there is yet light."

Jose expressed his pleasure; and a few minutes later the two men, with
Carmen dancing along happily beside them, were climbing the shaly
eminence upon the summit of which stood the second church. On the way
they passed the town cemetery.

"The Spanish cemetery never grows," commented Jose, stopping at the
crumbling gateway and peering in. The place of sepulture was the
epitome of utter desolation. A tumbled brick wall surrounded it, and
there were a few broken brick vaults, in some of which whitening bones
were visible. In a far corner was a heap of human bones and bits of
decayed coffins.

"Their rent fell due, Padre," said Rosendo with a little laugh,
indicating the bones. "The Church rents this ground to the people--it
is consecrated, you know. And if the payments are not made, why, the
bones come up and are thrown over there."

"Humph!" grunted Jose. "Worse than heathenish!"

"But you see, Padre, the Church is only concerned with souls. And it
is better to pay the money to get souls out of purgatory than to rent
a bit of ground for the body, is it not?"

Jose wisely vouchsafed no answer.

"Come, Padre," continued Rosendo. "I would not want to have to spend
the night here. For, you know, if a man spends a night in a cemetery
an evil spirit settles upon him--is it not so?"

Jose still kept silence before the old man's inbred superstition. A
few minutes later they stood before the old church. It was in the
Spanish mission style, but smaller than the one in the central
_plaza_.

"This was built in the time of your great-grandfather, Padre, the
father of Don Ignacio," offered Rosendo. "The Rincon family had many
powerful enemies throughout the country, and those in Simiti even
carried their ill feeling so far as to refuse to hear Mass in the
church which your family built. So they erected this one. No one ever
enters it now. Strange noises are sometimes heard inside, and the
people are afraid to go in. You see there are no houses built near it.
They say an angel of the devil lives here and thrashes around at times
in terrible anger. There is a story that many years ago, when I was
but a baby, the devil's angel came and entered this church one dark
night, when there was a terrible storm and the waves of the lake were
so strong that they tossed the crocodiles far up on the shore. And
when the bad angel saw the candles burning on the altar before the
sacred wafer he roared in anger and blew them out. But there was a
beautiful painting of the Virgin on the wall, and when the lights went
out she came down out of her picture and lighted the candles again.
But the devil's angel blew them out once more. And then, they say, the
Holy Virgin left the church in darkness and went out and locked the
wicked angel in, where he has been ever since. That was to show her
displeasure against the enemies of the great Rincons for erecting this
church. The _Cura_ died suddenly that night; and the church has never
been used since The Virgin, you know, is the special guardian Saint of
the Rincon family."

"But you do not believe the story, Rosendo?" Jose asked.

"_Quien sabe?_" was the noncommittal reply.

"Do you really think the Virgin could or would do such a thing,
Rosendo?"

"Why not, Padre? She has the same power as God, has she not? The frame
which held her picture"--reverting again to the story--"was found out
in front of the church the next morning; but the picture itself was
gone."

Jose glanced down at Carmen, who had been listening with a tense, rapt
expression on her face. What impression did this strange story make
upon her? She looked up at the priest with a little laugh.

"Let us go in, Padre," she said.

"No!" commanded Rosendo, seizing her hand.

"Are you afraid, Rosendo?" queried the amused Jose.

"I--I would--rather not," the old man replied hesitatingly. "The
Virgin has sealed it." Physical danger was temperamental to this noble
son of the jungle; yet the religious superstition which Spain had
bequeathed to this oppressed land still shackled his limbs.

As they descended the hill Carmen seized an opportunity to speak to
Jose alone. "Some day, Padre," she whispered, "you and I will open the
door and let the bad angel out, won't we?"

Jose pressed her little hand. He knew that the door of his own mind
had swung wide at her bidding in these few days, and many a bad angel
had gone out forever.




CHAPTER 6


The dawn of a new day broke white and glistering upon the ancient
_pueblo_. From their hard beds of palm, and their straw mats on the
dirt floors, the provincial dwellers in this abandoned treasure house
of Old Spain rose already dressed to resume the monotonous routine of
their lowly life. The duties which confronted them were few, scarce
extending beyond the procurement of their simple food. And for all,
excepting the two or three families which constituted the shabby
aristocracy of Simiti, this was limited in the extreme. Indian corn,
_panela_, and coffee, with an occasional addition of _platanos_ or
rice, and now and then bits of _bagre_, the coarse fish yielded by the
adjacent lake, constituted the staple diet of the average citizen of
this decayed hamlet. A few might purchase a bit of lard at rare
intervals; and this they hoarded like precious jewels. Some
occasionally had wheat flour; but the long, difficult transportation,
and its rapid deterioration in that hot, moist climate, where swarms
of voracious insects burrow into everything not cased in tin or iron,
made its cost all but prohibitive. A few had goats and chickens. Some
possessed pigs. And the latter even exceeded in value the black, naked
babes that played in the hot dust of the streets with them.

Jose was up at dawn. Standing in the warm, unadulterated sunlight in
his doorway he watched the village awaken. At a door across the
_plaza_ a woman appeared, smoking a cigar, with the lighted end in her
mouth. Jose viewed with astonishment this curious custom which
prevails in the _Tierra Caliente_. He had observed that in Simiti
nearly everybody of both sexes was addicted to the use of tobacco, and
it was no uncommon sight to see children of tender age smoking heavy,
black cigars with keen enjoyment. From another door issued two
fishermen, who, seeing the priest, approached and asked his blessing
on their day's work. Some moments later he heard a loud tattoo, and
soon the Alcalde of the village appeared, marching pompously through
the streets, preceded by his tall, black secretary, who was beating
lustily upon a small drum. At each street intersection the little
procession halted, while the Alcalde with great impressiveness
sonorously read a proclamation just received from the central
Government at Bogota to the effect that thereafter no cattle might be
killed in the country without the payment of a tax as therein set
forth. Groups of _peones_ gathered slowly about the few little stores
in the main street, or entered and inspected for the thousandth time
the shabby stocks. Matrons with black, shining faces cheerily greeted
one another from their doorways. Everywhere prevailed a gentle decorum
of speech and manners. For, however lowly the station, however pinched
the environment, the dwellers in this ancient town were ever gentle,
courteous and dignified. Their conversation dealt with the simple
affairs of their quiet life. They knew nothing of the complex
problems, social, economic, or religious, which harassed their
brethren of the North. No dubious aspirations or ambitions stirred
their breasts. Nothing of the frenzied greed and lust of material
accumulation touched their child-like minds. They dwelt upon a plane
far, far removed, in whatever direction, from the mental state of
their educated and civilized brothers of the great States, who from
time to time undertake to advise them how to live, while ruthlessly
exploiting them for material gain. And thus they have been exploited
ever since the heavy hand of the Spaniard was laid upon them, four
centuries ago. Thus they will continue to be, until that distant day
when mankind shall have learned to find their own in another's good.

As his eyes swept his environment, the untutored folk, the old church,
the dismally decrepit mud houses, with an air of desolation and utter
abandon brooding over all; and as he reflected that his own complex
nature, rather than any special malice of fortune, had brought this to
him, Jose's heart began to sink under the sting of a condemning
conscience. He turned back into his house. Its pitiful emptiness smote
him sore. No books, no pictures, no furnishings, nothing that
ministers to the comfort of a civilized and educated man! And yet,
amid this barrenness he had resolved to live.

A song drifted to him through the pulsing heat of the morning air. It
sifted through the mud walls of his poor dwelling, and poured into the
open doorway, where it hovered, quivering, like the dust motes in the
sunbeams. Instantly the man righted himself. It was Carmen, the child
to whom his life now belonged. Resolutely he again set his wandering
mind toward the great thing he would accomplish--the protection and
training of this girl, even while, if might be, he found his life
again in hers. Nothing on earth should shake him from that purpose!
Doubt and uncertainty were powerless to dull the edge of his efforts.
His bridges were burned behind him; and on the other side of the great
gulf lay the dead self which he had abandoned forever.

A harsh medley of loud, angry growls, interspersed with shrill yelps,
suddenly arose before his house, and Jose hastened to the door just in
time to see Carmen rush into the street and fearlessly throw herself
upon two fighting dogs.

"Cucumbra! Stop it instantly!" she exclaimed, dragging the angry brute
from a thoroughly frightened puppy.

"Shame! shame! And after all I've talked to you about loving that
puppy!"

The gaunt animal slunk down, with its tail between its legs.

"Did you ever gain anything at all by fighting? You know you never
did! And right down in your heart you know you love that puppy. You've
_got_ to love him; you can't help it! And you might as well begin
right now."

The beast whimpered at her little bare feet.

"Cucumbra, you let bad thoughts use you, didn't you? Yes, you did; and
you're sorry for it now. Well, there's the puppy," pointing to the
little dog, which stood hesitant some yards away. "Now go and play
with him," she urged. "Play with him!" rousing the larger dog and
pointing toward the puppy. "Play with him! You _know_ you love him!"

Cucumbra hesitated, looking alternately at the small, resolute girl
and the smaller dog. Her arm remained rigidly extended, and
determination was written large in her set features. The puppy uttered
a sharp bark, as if in forgiveness, and began to scamper playfully
about. Cucumbra threw a final glance at the girl.

"Play with him!" she again commanded.

The large dog bounded after the puppy, and together they disappeared
around the street corner.

The child turned and saw Jose, who had regarded the scene in mute
astonishment.

"_Muy buenos dias, Senor Padre_," dropping a little courtesy. "But
isn't Cucumbra foolish to have bad thoughts?"

"Why, yes--he certainly is," replied Jose slowly, hard pressed by the
unusual question.

"He has just _got_ to love that puppy, or else he will never be happy,
will he, Padre?"

Why would this girl persist in ending her statements with an
interrogation! How could he know whether Cucumbra's happiness would be
imperfect if he failed in love toward the puppy?

"Because, you know, Padre," the child continued, coming up to him and
slipping her hand into his, "padre Rosendo once told me that God was
Love; and after that I knew we just had to love everything and
everybody, or else He can't see us--can He, Padre?"

He can't see us--if we don't love everything and everybody! Well! Jose
wondered what sort of interpretation the Vatican, with its fiery
hatred of heretics, would put upon this remark.

"Can He, Padre?" insisted the girl.

"Dear child, in these matters you are teaching me; not I you," replied
the noncommittal priest.

"But, Padre, you are going to teach the people in the church," the
girl ventured quizzically.

Ah, so he was! And he had wondered what. In his hour of need the
answer was vouchsafed him.

"Yes, dearest child--and I am going to teach them what I learn from
_you_."

Carmen regarded him for a moment uncertainly. "But, padre Rosendo says
you are to teach _me_," she averred.

"And so I am, little one," the priest replied; "but not one half as
much as I shall learn from you."

Dona Maria's summons to breakfast interrupted the conversation.
Throughout the repast Jose felt himself subjected to the closest
scrutiny by Carmen. What was running through her thought, he could
only vaguely surmise. But he instinctively felt that he was being
weighed and appraised by this strange child, and that she was finding
him wanting in her estimate of what manner of man a priest of God
ought to be. And yet he knew that she embraced him in her great love.
Oftentimes his quick glance at her would find her serious gaze bent
upon him. But whenever their eyes met, her sweet face would instantly
relax and glow with a smile of tenderest love--a love which, he felt,
was somehow, in some way, destined to reconstruct his shattered life.

Jose's plans for educating the girl had gradually evolved into
completion during the past two days. He explained them at length to
Rosendo after the morning meal; and the latter, with dilating eyes,
manifested his great joy by clasping the priest in his brawny arms.

"But remember, Rosendo," Jose said, "learning is not _knowing_. I can
only teach her book-knowledge. But even now, an untutored child, she
knows more that is real than I do."

"Ah, Padre, have I not told you many times that she is not like us?
And now you know it!" exclaimed the emotional Rosendo, his eyes
suffused with tears of joy as he beheld his cherished ideals and his
longing of years at last at the point of realization. What he, too,
had instinctively seen in the child was now to be summoned forth; and
the vague, half-understood motive which had impelled him to take the
abandoned babe from Badillo into the shelter of his own great heart
would at length be revealed. The man's joy was ecstatic. With a final
clasp of the priest's hand, he rushed from the house to plunge into
the work in progress at the church.

Jose summoned Carmen into the quiet of his own dwelling. She came
joyfully, bringing an ancient and obsolete arithmetic and a much
tattered book, which Jose discovered to be a chronicle of the heroic
deeds of the early _Conquistadores_.

"I'm through decimals!" she exclaimed with glistening eyes; "and I've
read some of this, but I don't like it," making a little _moue_ of
disgust and holding aloft the battered history.

"Padre Rosendo told me to show it to you," she continued. "But it is
all about murder, you know. And yet," with a little sigh, "he has
nothing else to read, excepting old newspapers which the steamers
sometimes leave at Bodega Central. And they are all about murder, and
stealing, and bad things, too. Padre, why don't people write about
good things?"

Jose gazed at her reverently, as of old the sculptor Phidias might
have stood in awe before the vision which he saw in the unchiseled
marble.

"Padre Rosendo helped me with the fractions," went on the girl,
flitting lightly to another topic; "but I had to learn the decimals
myself. He couldn't understand them. And they are so easy, aren't
they? I just love arithmetic!" hugging the old book to her little
bosom.

Both volumes, printed in Madrid, were reliques of Spanish colonial
days.

"Read to me, Carmen," said Jose, handing her the history.

The child took the book and began to read, with clear enunciation, the
narrative of Quesada's sanguinary expedition to Bogota, undertaken in
the name of the gentle Christ. Jose wondered as he listened what
interpretation this fresh young mind would put upon the motives of
that renowned exploit. Suddenly she snapped the book shut.

"Tell me about Jesus," she demanded.

The precipitation with which the question had been propounded almost
took his breath away. He raised his eyes to hers, and looked long and
wonderingly into their infinite depths. And then the vastness of the
problem enunciated by her demand loomed before him. What, after all,
did he know about Jesus? Had he not arrived in Simiti in a state of
agnosticism regarding religion? Had he not come there enveloped in
confusion, baffled, beaten, hopeless? And then, after his wonderful
talk with Rosendo, had he not agreed with him that the child's thought
must be kept free and open--that her own instinctive religious ideas
must be allowed to develop normally, unhampered and unfettered by the
external warp and bias of human speculation? It was part of his plan
that all reference to matters theological should be omitted from
Carmen's educational scheme. Yet here was that name on her lips--the
first time he had ever heard it voiced by her. And it smote him like a
hammer. He made haste to divert further inquiry.

"Not now, little one," he said hastily. "I want to hear you read more
from your book."

"No," she replied firmly, laying the volume upon the table. "I don't
like it; and I shouldn't think you would, either. Besides, it isn't
true; it never really happened."

"Why, of course it is true, child! It is history, the story of how the
brave Spaniards came into this country long ago. We will read a great
deal more about them later."

"No," with a decisive shake of her brown head; "not if it is like
this. It isn't true; I told padre Rosendo it wasn't."

"Well, what do you mean, child?" asked the uncomprehending priest.

"It is only a lot of bad thoughts printed in a book," she replied
slowly. "And it isn't true, because God is _everywhere_."

Clearly the man was encountering difficulties at the outset; and a
part, at least, of his well-ordered curriculum stood in grave danger
of repudiation at the hands of this earnest little maid.

The girl stood looking at him wistfully. Then her sober little face
melted in smiles. With childish impulsiveness she clambered into his
lap, and twining her arms about his neck, impressed a kiss upon his
cheek.

"I love you, Padre," she murmured; "and you love me, don't you?"

He pressed her to him, startled though he was. "God knows I do, little
one!" he exclaimed.

"Of course He does," she eagerly agreed; "and He knows you don't want
to teach me anything that isn't true, doesn't He, Padre dear?"

Yea, and more; for Jose was realizing now, what he had not seen
before, that _it was beyond his power to teach her that which was not
true_. The magnitude and sacredness of his task impressed him as never
before. His puzzled brain grappled feebly with the enormous problem.
She had rebuked him for trying to teach her things which, if he
accepted the immanence of God as fact, her logic had shown him were
utterly false. Clearly the grooves in which this child's pure thought
ran were not his own. And if she would not think as he did, what
recourse was there left him but to accept the alternative and think
with her? For he would not, even if he could, force upon her his own
thought-processes.

"Then, Carmen," he finally ventured, "you do not wish to learn about
people and what they have done and are doing in the big world about
you?"

"Oh, yes, Padre; tell me all about the good things they did!"

"But they did many wicked things too, _chiquita_. And the good and the
bad are all mixed up together."

"No," she shook her head vigorously; "there isn't any bad. There is
only good, for God is everywhere--isn't He?"

She raised up and looked squarely into the priest's eyes. Dissimulation,
hypocrisy, quibble, cant--nothing but fearless truth could meet that
gaze.

Suddenly a light broke in upon his clouded thought. This girl--this
tender plant of God--why, she had shown it from the very beginning!
And he, oh, blind that he was! he could not see nor accept it. The
secret of her power, of her ecstasy of life--what was it but
this?--_she knew no evil!_

And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, "Of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat: but of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die."

Oh, great God! It was the first--the very first--lesson which Thou
didst teach Thy child, Israel, as the curtain rose upon the drama of
human life! And the awful warning has rung down through the corridors
of time from the mouths of the prophets, whom we slew lest they wake
us from our mesmeric sleep! Israel forgot Thy words; and the world has
forgotten them, long, long since. Daily we mix our perfumed draft of
good and evil, and sink under its lethal influence! Hourly we eat of
the forbidden tree, till the pangs of death encompass us!

And when at last the dark angel hovered over the sin-stricken earth
and claimed it for his own, the great Master came to sound again the
warning--"As a man thinketh in his heart, _so is he_!" But they would
have none of him, and nailed him to a tree!

Oh, Jerusalem! Oh, ye incarnate human mind! Even the unique Son of God
wept as he looked with yearning upon you! Why? Because of your
stubborn clinging to false ways, false beliefs, false thoughts of God
and man! Because ye would not be healed; ye would not be made whole!
Ye loved evil--ye gave it life and power, and ye rolled it like a
sweet morsel beneath your tongue--and so ye died! So came death into
this fair world, through the heart, the brain, the mind of man, _who
sought to know what God could not_!

"Padre dear, you are so quiet." The girl nestled closer to the awed
priest. Aye! And so the multitude on Sinai had stood in awed quiet as
they listened to the voice of God.

This child knew no evil! The man could not grasp the infinite
import of the marvelous fact. And yet he had sought to teach her
falsities--to teach her that evil did exist, as real and as potent
as good, and that it was to be accepted and honored by mankind! But
she had turned her back upon the temptation.

"Padre, are you going to tell me about Jesus?"

The priest roused from his deep meditation.

"Yes, yes--I want to know nothing else! I will get my Bible, and we
will read about him!"

"Bible? What is that, Padre dear?"

"What! You don't know what the Bible is?" cried the astonished
priest.

"No, Padre."

"But have you never--has your padre Rosendo never told you that it is
the book that tells--?"

"No," the girl shook her head. "But," her face kindling, "he told me
that Jesus was God's only son. But we are all His children, aren't
we?"

"Yes--especially you, little one! But Jesus was the greatest--"

"Did Jesus write the Bible, Padre?" the girl asked earnestly.

"No--we don't know who did. People used to think God wrote it; but I
guess He didn't."

"Then we will not read it, Padre."

The man bent reverently over the little brown head and prayed again
for guidance. What could he do with this child, who dwelt with
Jehovah--who saw His reflection in every flower and hill and fleecy
cloud--who heard His voice in the sough of the wind, and the ripple of
the waters on the pebbly shore! And, oh, that some one had bent over
him and prayed for guidance when he was a tender lad and his heart
burned with yearning for truth!

"God wrote the arithmetic--I mean, He told people how to write it,
didn't He, Padre?"

Surely the priest could acquiesce in this, for mathematics is purely
metaphysical, and without guile.

"Yes, _chiquita_. And we will go right through this little book. Then,
if I can, I will send for others that will teach you wonderful things
about what we call mathematics."

The child smiled her approval. The priest had now found the only path
which she would tread with him, and he continued with enthusiasm.

"And God taught people how to talk, little one; but they don't all
talk as we do. There is a great land up north of us, which we call the
United States, and there the people would not understand us, for we
speak Spanish. I must teach you their language, _chiquita_, and I must
teach you others, too, for you will not always live in Simiti."

"I want to stay here always, Padre. I love Simiti." "No, Carmen; God
has work for you out in His big world. You have something to tell His
people some day, a message for them. But you and I have much work to
do here first. And so we will begin with the arithmetic and English.
Later we will study other languages, and we will talk them to each
other until you speak them as fluently as your own. And meanwhile, I
will tell you about the great countries of the world, and about the
people that live in them. And we will study about the stars, and the
rocks, and the animals; and we will read and work and read and work
all day long, every day!" The priest's face was aglow with animation.

"But, Padre, when shall I have time to think?"

"Why, you will be thinking all the time, child!"

"No, you don't understand. I have to think about other things."

Jose looked at her with a puzzled expression. "What other things do
you have to think about, _chiquita_?"

"About all the people here who are sick and unhappy, and who quarrel
and don't love one another."

"Do you think about people when they are sick?" he asked with
heightened curiosity.

"Yes, always!" she replied vigorously "When they are sick I go where
nobody can find me and then just think that it isn't so."

"_Hombre!_" the priest ejaculated, his astonishment soaring Then--

"But when people are sick it is really so, isn't it, _chiquita_?"

"No!" emphatically. "It can't be--not if God is everywhere. Does He
make them sick?" The child drove the heart-searching question straight
into him.

"Why--no, I can't say that He does. And yet they somehow get sick."

"Because they think bad things, Padre. Because they don't think about
God. They don't think He is here. And they don't care about Him--they
don't love Him. And so they get sick," she explained succinctly.

Jose's mind reverted to what Rosendo had told him. When he lay tossing
in delirium Carmen had said that he would not die. And yet that was
perfectly logical, if she refused to admit the existence of evil.

"I thought lots about you last week, Padre."

The soft voice was close to his ear, and every breath swept over his
heartstrings and made them vibrate.

"Every night when I went to sleep I told God I _knew_ He would cure
you."

The priest's head sank upon his breast.

Verily, I have not seen such faith, no, not in Israel! And the faith
of this child had glorified her vision until she saw "the heavens open
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man."

"Carmen"--the priest spoke reverently--"do the sick ones always get
well when you think about them?"

There was not a shade of euphemism in the unhesitating reply--

"They are never really sick, Padre."

"But, by that you mean--"

"They only have bad thoughts."

"Sick thoughts, then?" he suggested by way of drawing out her full
meaning.

"Yes, Padre--for God, you know, really _is_ everywhere."

"Carmen!" cried the man. "What put such ideas into your little head?
Who told you these things?"

Her brown eyes looked full into his own. "God, Padre dear."

God! Yes, of a verity she spoke truth. For nothing but her constant
communion with Him could have filled her pure thought with a deeper,
truer lore than man has ever quaffed at the world's great fountains of
learning. He himself, trained by Holy Church, deeply versed in
letters, science, and theology, grounded in all human learning, sat in
humility at her feet, drinking in what his heart told him he had at
length found--Truth.

He had one more question to ask. "Carmen, how do you know, how are you
sure, that He told you?"

"Because it is true, Padre."

"But just how do you know that it is true?" he insisted.

"Why--it comes out that way; just like the answers to the problems in
arithmetic. I used to try to see if by thinking only good thoughts
to-day I would be better and happier to-morrow."

"Yes, and--?"

"Well, I always was, Padre. And so now I don't think anything but good
thoughts."

"That is, you think only about God?"

"I always think about Him _first_, Padre."

He had no further need to question her proofs, for he knew she was
taught by the Master himself.

"That will be all for this morning, Carmen," he said quietly, as he
put her down. "Leave me now. I, too, have some thinking to do."

When Carmen left him, Jose lapsed into profound meditation. Musing
over his life experiences, he at last summed them all up in the vain
attempt to evolve an acceptable concept of God, an idea of Him that
would satisfy. He had felt that in Christianity he had hold of
something beneficent, something real; but he had never been able to
formulate it, nor lift it above the shadows into the clear light
of full comprehension. And the result of his futile efforts to this
end had been agnosticism. His inability conscientiously to accept
the mad reasoning of theologians and the impudent claims of Rome had
been the stumbling block to his own and his family's dearest earthly
hopes. He knew that popular Christianity was a disfigurement of truth.
He knew that the theological claptrap which the Church, with such
oracular assurance, such indubitable certainty and gross assumption
of superhuman knowledge, handed out to a suffering world, was a
travesty of the divinely simple teachings of Jesus, and that it had
estranged mankind from their only visible source of salvation, the
Bible. He saw more clearly than ever before that in the actual
achievements of popular theology there had been ridiculously little
that a seriously-minded man could accept as supports to its claims
to be a divinely revealed scheme of salvation. Yet there was no
vital question on which certainty was so little demanded, and
seemingly of so little consequence, as this, even though the
joints of the theologians' armor flapped wide to the assaults of
unprejudiced criticism.

But if the slate were swept clean--if current theological dogma were
overthrown, and the stage set anew--what could be reared in their
stead? Is it true that the Bible is based upon propositions which can
be verified by all? The explorer in Cartagena had given Jose a new
thought in Arnold's concept of God as "the Eternal, not ourselves,
that makes for righteousness." And it was not to be denied that, from
first to last, the Bible is a call to righteousness.

But what is righteousness? Ethical conduct? Assuredly something vastly
more profound, for even that "misses the mark." No, righteousness was
right conduct until the marvelous Jesus appeared. But he swept it at
once from the material into the mental; from the outward into the
inward; and defined it as _right-thinking_!

"Righteousness!" murmured Jose, sitting with head buried in his hands.
"Aye, the whole scheme of salvation is held in that one word! And the
wreck of my life has been caused by my blind ignorance of its
tremendous meaning! For righteousness is salvation. But Carmen, wise
little soul, divined it instinctively; for, if there is one thing that
is patent, it is that if a thing is evil it does not exist for her.
Righteousness! Of course it means _thinking no evil_! Jesus lived his
thorough understanding of it. And so does Carmen. And so would the
world, but for the withering influence of priestly authority!"

At that moment Carmen reappeared to summon him to lunch.

"Come here, little girl," said Jose, drawing her to him. "You asked me
to tell you about Jesus. He was the greatest and best man that ever
lived. And it was because he never had a bad thought."

"Did he know that God was everywhere?" The little face turned lovingly
up to his.

"He did, sweet child. And so do I--now; for I have found Him even in
desolate Simiti."




CHAPTER 7


Carmen's studies began in earnest that afternoon. In the quiet of his
humble cottage Jose, now "a prisoner of the Lord," opened the door of
his mental storehouse and carefully selected those first bits of
knowledge for the foundation stones on which to rear for her, little
by little, a broad education.

He found her a facile learner; her thorough ease in the rudiments
of arithmetic and in the handling of her own language delighted him.
His plan of tutelage, although the result of long contemplation, and
involving many radical ideas regarding the training of children,
ideas which had been slowly developing in his mind for years, he
nevertheless felt in her case to be tentative. For he was dealing
with no ordinary child; and so the usual methods of instruction were
here wholly out of the question.

But on several points he was already firmly resolved. First, he would
get well below the surface of this child's mind, and he would endeavor
to train her to live in a depth of thought far, far beneath the froth
and superficiality of the every-day thinking of mankind. Fortunately,
she had had no previous bad training to be counteracted now. Nature
had been her only tutor; and Rosendo's canny wisdom had kept out all
human interference. Her associates in Simiti were few. Her unusual and
mature thought had set up an intellectual barrier between herself and
the playmates she might have had. Fortunately, too, Jose had now to
deal with a child who all her life had thought vigorously--and, he was
forced to conclude, correctly. Habits of accurate observation and
quick and correct interpretation would not be difficult to form in
such a mind. Moreover, to this end he would aim to maintain her
interest at the point of intensity in every subject undertaken; yet
without forcing, and without sacrifice of the joys of childhood. He
would be, not teacher only, but fellow-student. He would strive to
learn with her to conceive the ideal without losing sight of the fact
that it was a human world in which they dwelt. When she wished to
play, he would play with her. But he would contrive and direct their
amusements so as to carry instruction, to elucidate and exemplify it,
to point morals, and steadily to contribute to her store of knowledge.
His plan was ideal, he knew. But he could not know then that
Nature--if we may thus call it--had anticipated him, and that the
child, long since started upon the quest for truth, would quickly
outstrip him in the matter of conceiving the ideal and living in this
world of relative fact with an eye single to the truth which shines so
dimly through it.

Jose knew, as he studied Carmen and planned her training, that
whatever instruction he offered her must be without taint of evil, so
far as he might prevent. And yet, the thought of any attempt to
withhold from her a knowledge of evil brought a sardonic smile to his
lips. She had as yet everything to learn of the world about her. Could
such learning be imparted to her free from error or hypothesis, and
apart from the fiat of the speculative human mind? It must be; for he
knew from experience that she would accept his teaching only as he
presented every apparent fact, every object, every event, as a
reflection in some degree of her immanent God, and subject to rigid
demonstration. Where historical events externalized only the evil
motives of the carnal mind, he must contrive to omit them entirely, or
else present them as unreality, the result of "bad thoughts" and
forgetfulness of God. In other words, only as he assumed to be the
channel through which God spoke to her could he hope for success. To
impart to her a knowledge of both good and evil was, at least at
present, impossible. To force it upon her later would be criminal.
Moreover, _why not try the audacious experiment of permitting and
aiding this child to grow up without a knowledge of evil_?--that is,
in her present conviction that only good is real, potent and
permanent, while evil is impotent illusion and to be met and overcome
on that basis. Would the resultant training make of her a tower of
strength--or would it render her incapable of resisting the onslaughts
of evil when at length she faced the world? His own heart sanctioned
the plan; and--well, the final judgment should be left to Carmen
herself.

The work proceeded joyously. At times Cucumbra interrupted by bounding
in, as if impatient of the attention his little mistress was giving
her tutor. Frequently the inquisitive Cantar-las-horas stalked through
the room, displaying a most dignified and laudable interest in the
proceedings. Late in the afternoon, when the sun was low, Bosendo
appeared at the door. As he stood listening to Jose's narrative of men
and places in the outside world, his eyes bulged. At length his
untutored mind became strained to its elastic limit.

"Is that true, Padre?" he could not refrain from interrupting, when
Jose had spoken of the fast trains of England. "Why, the Simiti trail
to Tachi is one hundred and fifty miles long; and it always took me
six days to walk it. And do you say there are trains that travel that
distance in as many hours?"

"There are trains, Rosendo, that traverse the distance in three
hours."

"_Na_, Padre, it can't be done!" cried the incredulous Rosendo,
shaking his head.

"Leave us, unbeliever!" laughed Jose, motioning him away. "I have more
pliable material here to handle than you."

But Rosendo remained; and it was evident to the priest that he had
come on an errand of importance. Moreover, the supper hour was at
hand, and perhaps Dona Maria needed Carmen's help. So, dismissing the
child, Jose turned to Rosendo.

"You were right," he began, as if taking up the thread of a broken
discourse. "Carmen _was_ left on the river bank by the angels."

"Then you do think it was a miracle!" said Rosendo in a voice of awe,
as he sank into a chair.

The priest smiled. "Everything is a miracle, friend; for a miracle is
simply a sign of God's presence. And finding Carmen in this musty,
forgotten place is one of the greatest. For where she is, He is."

"Yes, Padre, that is true," assented Rosendo gravely.

"I was led here," continued Jose; "I see it now. Rosendo, all my life
I have regarded evil as just as real and powerful as good. And my life
has been one of bitterness and woe. Carmen sees only the good God
everywhere. And she dwells in heaven. What is the logical inference?
Simply that my mental attitude has been all wrong, my views erroneous,
my thinking bad. I have tried to know both good and evil, to eat of
the forbidden tree. And for so doing I was banished from paradise. Do
you understand me?"

"Why--well, no, Padre--that is, I--" The honest fellow was becoming
confused.

"Well, just this, then," explained the priest with animation. "I
haven't gotten anywhere in life, and neither have you, because we have
limited ourselves and crippled our efforts by yielding to fear, pride,
ignorance, and the belief in evil as a real power opposed to good."

"I have often wondered myself, Padre, how there could be a devil if
God is almighty. For in that case He would have had to make the devil,
wouldn't He?"

"Just so!" cried Jose enthusiastically. "And as He did make
everything, then either He made the devil, or else there isn't any."

"But that is pretty hard to see, Padre," replied the puzzled Rosendo.
"Something makes us do wicked things."

"Simply the belief that there is a power apart from God."

"But doesn't that belief come from the devil?"

"Surely--the devil of imagination! Listen, Rosendo: Carmen is daily
putting into practice her instinctive knowledge of a mighty fact. She
will reveal it all to us in due time. Let us patiently watch her, and
try to see and understand and believe as she does. But in the
meantime, let us guard our minds as we would a treasure house, and
strive never to let a thought of evil get inside! My past life should
serve as a perpetual warning."

Rosendo did not reply at once, but sat staring vacantly at the ground.
Jose knew that his thoughts were with his wayward daughter. Then, as
if suddenly remembering the object of his call, he took from his
wallet two letters, which he handed to Jose with the comment: "Juan
brought them up from Bodega Central this morning."

Jose took them with quickening pulse. One was from Spain, from his
uncle. He devoured it eagerly. It was six weeks old when it arrived in
Simiti, and had been written before the news of his removal from
Cartagena had reached Seville. His mother was well; and her hopes for
her son's preferment were steadily reviving, after the cruel blow
which his disgrace in Rome had given them. For his uncle's part, he
hoped that Jose had now seen the futility of opposition to Holy
Church, and that, yielding humbly to her gentle chastisement for the
great injury he had inflicted upon her, he would now make amends and
merit the favors which she was sure to bestow upon him in due season.
To this end the uncle would bring to bear his own influence and that
of His Eminence, the Archbishop of Seville. The letter closed with an
invocation to the Saints and the ever-blessed Virgin.

Jose opened the second letter. It was nominally from the Bishop of
Cartagena, although written, he well knew, by Wenceslas. His Reverence
regretted that Jose had not come to him again before leaving
Cartagena. He deplored exceedingly the necessity of assigning him to
so lowly a parish; but it was discipline. His tenure of the parish
would be a matter of probation. Assuming a penitent desire on the part
of the priest to make reparation for past indiscretions, His Grace
extended assurances of his support and tender consideration. And,
regarding him still as a faithful son, he was setting forth herewith
certain instructions which Jose would zealously carry out, to the
glory of the sacred Mother Church and the blessed Virgin, and to his
own edification, to wit: In the matter of the confessional he must be
unremittingly zealous, not failing to put such questions to the people
of Simiti as would draw out their most secret thoughts. In the present
crisis it was especially necessary to learn their political views.
Likewise, he must not fail to impress upon them the sin of concealing
wealth, and of withholding contributions to the support of the
glorious Mother. He, as priest of the parish, would be held personally
responsible for the collection of an adequate "Peter's Pence," which
must be sent to Cartagena at frequent intervals for subsequent
shipment to Rome. For all contributions he was to allow liberal
plenary indulgences. In the matter of inciting zeal for the salvation
of those unfortunate souls lingering in the torments of purgatory,
Jose must be unflagging. Each family in the parish should be
constantly admonished and threatened, if necessary, to have Masses
said for their deceased members; and he must forward the proceeds from
such Masses at once to Cartagena. No less important, he must keep
constantly before him the great fact that the hope of the blessed
Mother lay in her young. To this end he must see that all children in
his parish were in due time confirmed, and every effort made to have
the females sent to the convent of Mompox. To encourage his
parishioners, he might assure them of His Reverence's tender regard
for them as his beloved children, and that he had certain special
favors to grant to them in due time. Also, that a statue of the
Virgin, which had arrived from Rome, and which carried the most potent
blessing of the Holy Father, was to be bestowed upon that church in
the diocese which within the next twelve months should contribute the
largest amount of Peter's Pence in proportion to population. This plan
should be especially attractive to the people of Simiti, as the town
lay on the confines of a district renowned in the ancient annals for
its mineral wealth. Herein, too, lay a great opportunity for the
priest; and His Reverence rejoiced in the certain knowledge that he
would embrace it. Invoking the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the
Ever-Blessed Virgin and Saint Joseph, His Grace awaited with interest
the priest's first report from the parish of Simiti.

The letter fell like a wet blanket upon Jose, chilling him to the
marrow, for it revived with cruel poignancy the fact that he was still
a servant of Rome. In the past few happy days he had dwelt apart from
the world in the consciousness of a new heaven and a new earth,
revealed by Carmen. This sudden call to duty was like a summons from
Mephistopheles to the fulfillment of a forgotten pact.

He carefully read the letter again. Beneath the specious kindliness of
Wenceslas lay sinister motives, he knew. Among them, greed, of course.
But--a darker thought--did Wenceslas know of Carmen's existence? Could
Cartagena have received any intimation of his plans for her? Refusal
to comply with these instructions meant--he dared not think what! On
the other hand, strict compliance with them certainly was out of the
question.

As for Peter's Pence, what could the impoverished folk of this
decrepit town furnish! And yet, if a reasonable sum could only be
contributed at frequent intervals, would not the vampire Wenceslas
rest content, at least for a while? Oh, for a fortune of his own, that
he might dump it all into the yawning maw of Holy Church, and thus
gain a few years' respite for himself and Carmen!

"Bad news, Padre?" Rosendo inquired, anxiously regarding the priest's
strained features.

What could the man do or say, limited, hounded, and without resources?
Could he force these simple people to buy Masses? Could he take their
money on a pretext which he felt to be utterly false? Yet Cartagena
_must_ be kept quiet at any hazard!

"Rosendo," he asked earnestly, "when you had a priest in Simiti, did
the people have Masses offered for their dead?"

"_Na_, Padre, we have little money for Masses," replied Rosendo
sadly.

"But you have bought them?"

"At times--long ago--for my first wife, when she died without a
priest, up in the Tigui country. But not when Padre Diego was here. I
couldn't see how Masses said by that drunken priest could please God,
or make Him release souls from purgatory--and Padre Diego was drunk
most of the time."

Jose became desperate. "Rosendo, we _must_ send money to the Bishop in
Cartagena. I _must_ stay here--I _must_! And I can stay only by
satisfying Wenceslas! If I can send him money he will think me too
valuable to remove. It is not the Church, Rosendo, but Wenceslas who
is persecuting me. It is he who has placed me here. He is using the
Church for his own evil ends. It is he who must be placated. But I--I
can't make these poor people buy Masses! And--but here, read his
letter," thrusting it into Rosendo's hand.

Rosendo shook his head thoughtfully, and a cloud had gathered over his
strong face when he returned the Bishop's letter to Jose.

"Padre, we will be hard pressed to support the church and you, without
buying Masses. There are about two hundred people here, perhaps fifty
families. But they are very, very poor. Only a few can afford to pay
even a _peso oro_ a month to the schoolmaster to have their children
taught. They may be able to give twenty _pesos_ a month to support you
and the church. But hardly more."

It seemed to Jose that his soul must burst under its limitations.

"Rosendo, let us take Carmen and flee!" he cried wildly.

"How far would we get, Padre? Have you money?"

No, Jose had nothing. He lapsed into silence-shrouded despair.

The sun dropped below the wooded hills, and Cantar-las-horas had sung
his weird vesper song. Dusk was thickening into night, though upon the
distant _Sierras_ a mellow glow still illumined the frosted peaks.
Moments crept slowly through the enveloping silence.

Then the mental gloom parted, and through it arose the great soul of
the black-faced man sitting beside the despairing priest.

"Padre"--Rosendo spoke slowly and with deep emotion. Tears trickled
down his swart cheeks--"I am no longer young. More than sixty years of
hardship and heavy toil rest upon me. My parents--I have not told you
this--were slaves. They worked in the mines of Guamoco, under hard
masters. They lived in bamboo huts, and slept on the damp ground. At
four each morning, year after year, they were driven from their hard
beds and sent out to toil under the lash fourteen hours a day, washing
gold from the streams. The gold went to the building of Cartagena's
walls, and to her Bishop, to buy idleness and luxury for him and his
fat priests. When the war came it lasted thirteen years; but we drove
the Christian Spaniards into the sea! Then my father and mother went
back to Guamoco; and there I was born. When I was old enough to use a
_batea_ I, too, washed gold in the Tigui, and in the little streams so
numerous in that region. But they had been pretty well washed out
under the Spaniards; and so my father came down here and made a little
_hacienda_ on the hills across the lake from Simiti. Then he and my
poor mother lay down and died, worn out with their long years of toil
for their cruel masters."

He brushed the tears from his eyes; then resumed: "The district of
Guamoco gradually became deserted. Revolution after revolution broke
out in this unhappy country, sometimes stirred up by the priests,
sometimes by political agitators who tried to get control of the
Government. The men and boys went to the wars, and were killed off.
Guamoco was again swallowed up by the forest--"

He stopped abruptly, and sat some moments silent.

"I have been back there many times since, and often I have washed gold
again along the beautiful Tigui," he continued. "But the awful
loneliness of the jungle, and the memories of those gloomy days when I
toiled there as a boy, and the thoughts of my poor parents' sufferings
under the Spaniards, made me so sad that I could not stay. And then I
got too old for that kind of work, standing bent over in the cold
mountain water all day long, swinging a _batea_ heavy with gravel."

He paused again, and seemed to lose himself in the memory of those
dark days.

"But there is still gold in the Tigui. I can find it. It means hard
work--but I can do it. Padre, I will go back there and wash out gold
for you to send to the Bishop of Cartagena, that you may stay here and
protect and teach the little Carmen. Perhaps in time I can wash enough
to get you both out of the country; but it will take many months, it
may be, years."

O, you, whose path in life winds among pleasant places, where roses
nod in the scented breeze and fountains play, picture to yourself, if
you may, the self-immolation of this sweet-souled man, who, in the
winter of life, the shadows of eternity fast gathering about him,
bends his black shoulders again to the burden which Love would lay
upon them. Aye, Love, into which all else merged--Love for the unknown
babe, left helpless and alone on the great river's bank--Love for the
radiant child, whose white soul the agents of carnal greed and lust
would prostitute to their iniquitous system.

Night fell. By the light of their single candle the priest and Rosendo
ate their simple fare in silence. Carmen was asleep, and the angels
watched over her lowly bed.

The meal ended, Rosendo took up the candle, and Jose followed him into
the bedroom. Reverently the two men approached the sleeping child and
looked down upon her. The priest's hand again sought Rosendo's in a
grasp which sealed anew the pact between them.




CHAPTER 8


Like the great Exemplar in the days of his preparation, Jose was
early driven by the spirit into the wilderness, where temptation
smote him sore. But his soul had been saved--"yet so as by fire."
Slowly old beliefs and faiths crumbled into dust, while the new
remained still unrevealed. The drift toward atheism which had set in
during his long incarceration in the convent of Palazzola had not
made him yield to the temptation to raise the mask of hypocrisy and
plunge into the pleasures of the world, nor accept the specious
proffer of ecclesiastical preferment in exchange for his honest
convictions. Honor, however bigoted the sense, bound him to his
oath, or at least to a compromising observance of it harmless to the
Church. Pride contributed to hold him from the degradation of a
renegade and apostate priest. And both rested primarily on an
unshaken basis of maternal affection, which fell little short of
obsession, leaving him without the strength to say, "Woman, what
have I to do with thee?"

But, though atheism in belief leads almost inevitably to disintegration
of morals, Jose had kept himself untainted. For his vital problems he
had now, after many days, found "grace sufficient." In what he had
regarded as the contemptible tricks of fate, he was beginning to
discern the guiding hand of a wisdom greater than the world's. The
danger threatened by Cartagena was, temporarily, at least, averted
by Rosendo's magnificent spirit. Under the spur of that sacrifice his
own courage rose mightily to second it.

Rosendo spent the day in preparation for his journey into the Guamoco
country. He had discussed with Jose, long and earnestly, its probable
effect upon the people of Simiti, and especially upon Don Mario, the
Alcalde; but it was decided that no further explanation should be made
than that he was again going to prospect in the mineral districts
already so familiar to him. As Rosendo had said, this venture,
together with the unannounced and unsolicited presence of the priest
in the town, could not but excite extreme curiosity and raise the most
lively conjectures, which might, in time, reach Wenceslas. On the
other hand, if success attended his efforts, it was more than probable
that Cartagena would remain quiet, as long as her itching palm was
brightened with the yellow metal which he hoped to wrest from the
sands of Guamoco. "It is only a chance, Padre," Rosendo said
dubiously. "In the days of the Spaniards the river sands of Guamoco
produced from two to ten _reales_ a day to each slave. But the rivers
have been almost washed out."

Jose made a quick mental calculation. A Spanish _real_ was equivalent
to half a franc. Then ten _reales_ would amount to five francs, the
very best he could hope for as a day's yield.

"And my supplies and the support of the senora and Carmen must come
out of that," Rosendo added. "Besides, I must pay Juan for working the
_hacienda_ across the lake for me while I am away."

Possibly ten _pesos oro_, or forty francs, might remain at the end of
each month for them to send to Cartagena. Jose sighed heavily as he
busied himself with the preparations.

"I got these supplies from Don Mario on credit, Padre," explained
Rosendo. "I thought best to buy from him to prevent making him angry.
I have coffee, _panela_, rice, beans, and tobacco for a month. He was
very willing to let me have them--but do you know why? He wants me to
go up there and fail. Then he will have me in his debt, and I become
his _peon_--and I would never be anything after that but his slave,
for never again would he let me get out of debt to him."

Jose shuddered at the th