



Produced by Iain Tatch.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists


by

Robert Tressell




CONTENTS

  1  An Imperial Banquet.  A Philosophical Discussion.  The Mysterious
     Stranger.  Britons Never shall be Slaves
  2  Nimrod: a Mighty Hunter before the Lord
  3  The Financiers
  4  The Placard
  5  The Clock-case
  6  It is not My Crime
  7  The Exterminating Machines
  8  The Cap on the Stairs
  9  Who is to Pay?
 10  The Long Hill
 11  Hands and Brains
 12  The Letting of the Room
 13  Penal Servitude and Death
 14  Three Children. The Wages of Intelligence
 15  The Undeserving Persons and the Upper and Nether Millstones
 16  True Freedom
 17  The Rev. John Starr
 18  The Lodger
 19  The Filling of the Tank
 20  The Forty Thieves.  The Battle: Brigands versus Bandits
 21  The Reign of Terror.  The Great Money Trick
 22  The Phrenologist
 23  The 'Open-air'
 24  Ruth
 25  The Oblong
 26  The Slaughter
 27  The March of the Imperialists
 28  The Week before Christmas
 29  The Pandorama
 30  The Brigands hold a Council of War
 31  The Deserter
 32  The Veteran
 33  The Soldier's Children
 34  The Beginning of the End
 35  Facing the 'Problem'
 36  The OBS
 37  A Brilliant Epigram
 38  The Brigands' Cave
 39  The Brigands at Work
 40  Vive la System!
 41  The Easter Offering.  The Beano Meeting
 42  June
 43  The Good Old Summer-time
 44  The Beano
 45  The Great Oration
 46  The 'Sixty-five'
 47  The Ghouls
 48  The Wise men of the East
 49  The Undesired
 50  Sundered
 51  The Widow's Son
 52  'It's a Far, Far Better Thing that I do, than I have Ever Done'
 53  Barrington Finds a Situation
 54  The End




Preface


In writing this book my intention was to present, in the form of an
interesting story, a faithful picture of working-class life--more
especially of those engaged in the Building trades--in a small town in
the south of England.

I wished to describe the relations existing between the workmen and
their employers, the attitude and feelings of these two classes towards
each other; their circumstances when at work and when out of
employment; their pleasures, their intellectual outlook, their
religious and political opinions and ideals.

The action of the story covers a period of only a little over twelve
months, but in order that the picture might be complete it was
necessary to describe how the workers are circumstanced at all periods
of their lives, from the cradle to the grave.  Therefore the characters
include women and children, a young boy--the apprentice--some
improvers, journeymen in the prime of life, and worn-out old men.

I designed to show the conditions relating from poverty and
unemployment: to expose the futility of the measures taken to deal with
them and to indicate what I believe to be the only real remedy,
namely--Socialism.  I intended to explain what Socialists understand by
the word 'poverty': to define the Socialist theory of the causes of
poverty, and to explain how Socialists propose to abolish poverty.

It may be objected that, considering the number of books dealing with
these subjects already existing, such a work as this was uncalled for.
The answer is that not only are the majority of people opposed to
Socialism, but a very brief conversation with an average anti-socialist
is sufficient to show that he does not know what Socialism means.  The
same is true of all the anti-socialist writers and the 'great
statesmen' who make anti-socialist speeches: unless we believe that
they are deliberate liars and imposters, who to serve their own
interests labour to mislead other people, we must conclude that they do
not understand Socialism.  There is no other possible explanation of
the extraordinary things they write and say.  The thing they cry out
against is not Socialism but a phantom of their own imagining.

Another answer is that 'The Philanthropists' is not a treatise or
essay, but a novel.  My main object was to write a readable story full
of human interest and based on the happenings of everyday life, the
subject of Socialism being treated incidentally.

This was the task I set myself.  To what extent I have succeeded is for
others to say; but whatever their verdict, the work possesses at least
one merit--that of being true.  I have invented nothing.  There are no
scenes or incidents in the story that I have not either witnessed
myself or had conclusive evidence of.  As far as I dared I let the
characters express themselves in their own sort of language and
consequently some passages may be considered objectionable.  At the
same time I believe that--because it is true--the book is not without
its humorous side.

The scenes and characters are typical of every town in the South of
England and they will be readily recognized by those concerned.  If the
book is published I think it will appeal to a very large number of
readers.  Because it is true it will probably be denounced as a libel
on the working classes and their employers, and upon the
religious-professing section of the community. But I believe it will be
acknowledged as true by most of those who are compelled to spend their
lives amid the surroundings it describes, and it will be evident that
no attack is made upon sincere religion.



Chapter 1

An Imperial Banquet.  A Philosophical Discussion.  The Mysterious
Stranger.  Britons Never shall be Slaves


The house was named 'The Cave'.  It was a large old-fashioned
three-storied building standing in about an acre of ground, and
situated about a mile outside the town of Mugsborough.  It stood back
nearly two hundred yards from the main road and was reached by means of
a by-road or lane, on each side of which was a hedge formed of hawthorn
trees and blackberry bushes.  This house had been unoccupied for many
years and it was now being altered and renovated for its new owner by
the firm of Rushton & Co., Builders and Decorators.

There were, altogether, about twenty-five men working there,
carpenters, plumbers, plasterers, bricklayers and painters, besides
several unskilled labourers.  New floors were being put in where the
old ones were decayed, and upstairs two of the rooms were being made
into one by demolishing the parting wall and substituting an iron
girder.  Some of the window frames and sashes were so rotten that they
were being replaced. Some of the ceilings and walls were so cracked and
broken that they had to be replastered.  Openings were cut through
walls and doors were being put where no doors had been before. Old
broken chimney pots were being taken down and new ones were being taken
up and fixed in their places.  All the old whitewash had to be washed
off the ceilings and all the old paper had to be scraped off the walls
preparatory to the house being repainted and decorated.  The air was
full of the sounds of hammering and sawing, the ringing of trowels, the
rattle of pails, the splashing of water brushes, and the scraping of
the stripping knives used by those who were removing the old wallpaper.
Besides being full of these the air was heavily laden with dust and
disease germs, powdered mortar, lime, plaster, and the dirt that had
been accumulating within the old house for years.  In brief, those
employed there might be said to be living in a Tariff Reform
Paradise--they had Plenty of Work.

At twelve o'clock Bob Crass--the painters' foreman--blew a blast upon a
whistle and all hands assembled in the kitchen, where Bert the
apprentice had already prepared the tea, which was ready in the large
galvanized iron pail that he had placed in the middle of the floor. By
the side of the pail were a number of old jam-jars, mugs, dilapidated
tea-cups and one or two empty condensed milk tins.  Each man on the
'job' paid Bert threepence a week for the tea and sugar--they did not
have milk--and although they had tea at breakfast-time as well as at
dinner, the lad was generally considered to be making a fortune.

Two pairs of steps, laid parallel on their sides at a distance of about
eight feet from each other, with a plank laid across, in front of the
fire, several upturned pails, and the drawers belonging to the dresser,
formed the seating accommodation.  The floor of the room was covered
with all manner of debris, dust, dirt, fragments of old mortar and
plaster.  A sack containing cement was leaning against one of the
walls, and a bucket containing some stale whitewash stood in one corner.

As each man came in he filled his cup, jam-jar or condensed milk tin
with tea from the steaming pail, before sitting down.  Most of them
brought their food in little wicker baskets which they held on their
laps or placed on the floor beside them.

At first there was no attempt at conversation and nothing was heard but
the sounds of eating and drinking and the drizzling of the bloater
which Easton, one of the painters, was toasting on the end of a pointed
stick at the fire.

'I don't think much of this bloody tea,' suddenly remarked Sawkins, one
of the labourers.

'Well it oughter be all right,' retorted Bert; 'it's been bilin' ever
since 'arf past eleven.'

Bert White was a frail-looking, weedy, pale-faced boy, fifteen years of
age and about four feet nine inches in height.  His trousers were part
of a suit that he had once worn for best, but that was so long ago that
they had become too small for him, fitting rather tightly and scarcely
reaching the top of his patched and broken hob-nailed boots. The knees
and the bottoms of the legs of his trousers had been patched with
square pieces of cloth, several shades darker than the original fabric,
and these patches were now all in rags.  His coat was several sizes too
large for him and hung about him like a dirty ragged sack. He was a
pitiable spectacle of neglect and wretchedness as he sat there on an
upturned pail, eating his bread and cheese with fingers that, like his
clothing, were grimed with paint and dirt.

'Well then, you can't have put enough tea in, or else you've bin usin'
up wot was left yesterday,' continued Sawkins.

'Why the bloody 'ell don't you leave the boy alone?' said Harlow,
another painter.  'If you don't like the tea you needn't drink it. For
my part, I'm sick of listening to you about it every damn day.'

'It's all very well for you to say I needn't drink it,' answered
Sawkins, 'but I've paid my share an' I've got a right to express an
opinion.  It's my belief that 'arf the money we gives 'him is spent on
penny 'orribles: 'e's always got one in 'is hand, an' to make wot tea
'e does buy last, 'e collects all the slops wot's left and biles it up
day after day.'

'No, I don't!' said Bert, who was on the verge of tears.  'It's not me
wot buys the things at all.  I gives the money I gets to Crass, and 'e
buys them 'imself, so there!'

At this revelation, some of the men furtively exchanged significant
glances, and Crass, the foreman, became very red.

'You'd better keep your bloody thruppence and make your own tea after
this week,' he said, addressing Sawkins, 'and then p'raps we'll 'ave a
little peace at meal-times.'

'An' you needn't ask me to cook no bloaters or bacon for you no more,'
added Bert, tearfully, 'cos I won't do it.'

Sawkins was not popular with any of the others.  When, about twelve
months previously, he first came to work for Rushton & Co., he was a
simple labourer, but since then he had 'picked up' a slight knowledge
of the trade, and having armed himself with a putty-knife and put on a
white jacket, regarded himself as a fully qualified painter.  The
others did not perhaps object to him trying to better his condition,
but his wages--fivepence an hour--were twopence an hour less than the
standard rate, and the result was that in slack times often a better
workman was 'stood off' when Sawkins was kept on.  Moreover, he was
generally regarded as a sneak who carried tales to the foreman and the
'Bloke'.  Every new hand who was taken on was usually warned by his new
mates 'not to let the b--r Sawkins see anything.'

The unpleasant silence which now ensued was at length broken by one of
the men, who told a dirty story, and in the laughter and applause that
followed, the incident of the tea was forgotten.

'How did you get on yesterday?' asked Crass, addressing Bundy, the
plasterer, who was intently studying the sporting columns of the Daily
Obscurer.

'No luck,' replied Bundy, gloomily. 'I had a bob each way on Stockwell,
in the first race, but it was scratched before the start.'

This gave rise to a conversation between Crass, Bundy, and one or two
others concerning the chances of different horses in the morrow's
races.  It was Friday, and no one had much money, so at the suggestion
of Bundy, a Syndicate was formed, each member contributing threepence
for the purpose of backing a dead certainty given by the renowned
Captain Kiddem of the Obscurer.  One of those who did not join the
syndicate was Frank Owen, who was as usual absorbed in a newspaper. He
was generally regarded as a bit of a crank: for it was felt that there
must be something wrong about a man who took no interest in racing or
football and was always talking a lot of rot about religion and
politics.  If it had not been for the fact that he was generally
admitted to be an exceptionally good workman, they would have had
little hesitation about thinking that he was mad.  This man was about
thirty-two years of age, and of medium height, but so slightly built
that he appeared taller.  There was a suggestion of refinement in his
clean-shaven face, but his complexion was ominously clear, and an
unnatural colour flushed the think cheeks.

There was a certain amount of justification for the attitude of his
fellow workmen, for Owen held the most unusual and unorthodox opinions
on the subjects mentioned.

The affairs of the world are ordered in accordance with orthodox
opinions.  If anyone did not think in accordance with these he soon
discovered this fact for himself.  Owen saw that in the world a small
class of people were possessed of a great abundance and superfluity of
the things that are produced by work.  He saw also that a very great
number--in fact the majority of the people--lived on the verge of want;
and that a smaller but still very large number lived lives of
semi-starvation from the cradle to the grave; while a yet smaller but
still very great number actually died of hunger, or, maddened by
privation, killed themselves and their children in order to put a
period to their misery.  And strangest of all--in his opinion--he saw
that people who enjoyed abundance of the things that are made by work,
were the people who did Nothing: and that the others, who lived in want
or died of hunger, were the people who worked.  And seeing all this he
thought that it was wrong, that the system that produced such results
was rotten and should be altered.  And he had sought out and eagerly
read the writings of those who thought they knew how it might be done.

It was because he was in the habit of speaking of these subjects that
his fellow workmen came to the conclusion that there was probably
something wrong with his mind.

When all the members of the syndicate had handed over their
contributions, Bundy went out to arrange matters with the bookie, and
when he had gone Easton annexed the copy of the Obscurer that Bundy had
thrown away, and proceeded to laboriously work through some carefully
cooked statistics relating to Free Trade and Protection. Bert, his eyes
starting out of his head and his mouth wide open, was devouring the
contents of a paper called The Chronicles of Crime.  Ned Dawson, a poor
devil who was paid fourpence an hour for acting as mate or labourer to
Bundy, or the bricklayers, or anyone else who wanted him, lay down on
the dirty floor in a corner of the room and with his coat rolled up as
a pillow, went to sleep.  Sawkins, with the same intention, stretched
himself at full length on the dresser.  Another who took no part in the
syndicate was Barrington, a labourer, who, having finished his dinner,
placed the cup he brought for his tea back into his dinner basket, took
out an old briar pipe which he slowly filled, and proceeded to smoke in
silence.

Some time previously the firm had done some work for a wealthy
gentleman who lived in the country, some distance outside Mugsborough.
This gentleman also owned some property in the town and it was commonly
reported that he had used his influence with Rushton to induce the
latter to give Barrington employment.  It was whispered amongst the
hands that the young man was a distant relative of the gentleman's, and
that he had disgraced himself in some way and been disowned by his
people.  Rushton was supposed to have given him a job in the hope of
currying favour with his wealthy client, from whom he hoped to obtain
more work.  Whatever the explanation of the mystery may have been, the
fact remained that Barrington, who knew nothing of the work except what
he had learned since he had been taken on, was employed as a painter's
labourer at the usual wages--fivepence per hour.

He was about twenty-five years of age and a good deal taller than the
majority of the others, being about five feet ten inches in height and
slenderly though well and strongly built.  He seemed very anxious to
learn all that he could about the trade, and although rather reserved
in his manner, he had contrived to make himself fairly popular with his
workmates.  He seldom spoke unless to answer when addressed, and it was
difficult to draw him into conversation.  At meal-times, as on the
present occasion, he generally smoked, apparently lost in thought and
unconscious of his surroundings.

Most of the others also lit their pipes and a desultory conversation
ensued.

'Is the gent what's bought this 'ouse any relation to Sweater the
draper?' asked Payne, the carpenter's foreman.

'It's the same bloke,' replied Crass.

'Didn't he used to be on the Town Council or something?'

''E's bin on the Council for years,' returned Crass.  ''E's on it now.
'E's mayor this year.  'E's bin mayor several times before.'

'Let's see,' said Payne, reflectively, ''e married old Grinder's
sister, didn't 'e?  You know who I mean, Grinder the greengrocer.'

'Yes, I believe he did,' said Crass.

'It wasn't Grinder's sister,' chimed in old Jack Linden.  'It was 'is
niece.  I know, because I remember working in their 'ouse just after
they was married, about ten year ago.'

'Oh yes, I remember now,' said Payne.  'She used to manage one of
Grinder's branch shops didn't she?'

'Yes,' replied Linden.  'I remember it very well because there was a
lot of talk about it at the time.  By all accounts, ole Sweater used to
be a regler 'ot un: no one never thought as he'd ever git married at
all: there was some funny yarns  about several young women what used to
work for him.'

This important matter being disposed of, there followed a brief
silence, which was presently broken by Harlow.

'Funny name to call a 'ouse, ain't it?' he said.  '"The Cave."  I
wonder what made 'em give it a name like that.'

'They calls 'em all sorts of outlandish names nowadays,' said old Jack
Linden.

'There's generally some sort of meaning to it, though,' observed Payne.
'For instance, if a bloke backed a winner and made a pile, 'e might
call 'is 'ouse, "Epsom Lodge" or "Newmarket Villa".'

'Or sometimes there's a hoak tree or a cherry tree in the garding,'
said another man; 'then they calls it "Hoak Lodge" or "Cherry Cottage".'

'Well, there's a cave up at the end of this garden,' said Harlow with a
grin, 'you know, the cesspool, what the drains of the 'ouse runs into;
praps they called it after that.'

'Talking about the drains,' said old Jack Linden when the laughter
produced by this elegant joke had ceased.  'Talking about the drains, I
wonder what they're going to do about them; the 'ouse ain't fit to live
in as they are now, and as for that bloody cesspool it ought to be done
away with.'

'So it is going to be,' replied Crass.  'There's going to be a new set
of drains altogether, carried right out to the road and connected with
the main.'

Crass really knew no more about what was going to be done in this
matter than did Linden, but he felt certain that this course would be
adopted.  He never missed an opportunity of enhancing his own prestige
with the men by insinuating that he was in the confidence of the firm.

'That's goin' to cost a good bit,' said Linden.

'Yes, I suppose it will,' replied Crass, 'but money ain't no object to
old Sweater.  'E's got tons of it; you know 'e's got a large wholesale
business in London and shops all over the bloody country, besides the
one 'e's got 'ere.'

Easton was still reading the Obscurer; he was not about to understand
exactly what the compiler of the figures was driving at--probably the
latter never intended that anyone should understand--but he was
conscious of a growing feeling of indignation and hatred against
foreigners of every description, who were ruining this country, and he
began to think that it was about time we did something to protect
ourselves.  Still, it was a very difficult question: to tell the truth,
he himself could not make head or tail of it.  At length he said aloud,
addressing himself to Crass:

'Wot do you think of this 'ere fissical policy, Bob?'

'Ain't thought much about it,' replied Crass.  'I don't never worry my
'ed about politics.'

'Much better left alone,' chimed in old Jack Linden sagely, 'argyfying
about politics generally ends up with a bloody row an' does no good to
nobody.'

At this there was a murmur of approval from several of the others. Most
of them were averse from arguing or disputing about politics.  If two
or three men of similar opinions happened to be together they might
discuss such things in a friendly and superficial way, but in a mixed
company it was better left alone.  The 'Fissical Policy' emanated from
the Tory party.  That was the reason why some of them were strongly in
favour of it, and for the same reason others were opposed to it.  Some
of them were under the delusion that they were Conservatives:
similarly, others imagined themselves to be Liberals. As a matter of
fact, most of them were nothing.  They knew as much about the public
affairs of their own country as they did of the condition of affairs in
the planet of Jupiter.

Easton began to regret that he had broached so objectionable a subject,
when, looking up from his paper, Owen said:

'Does the fact that you never "trouble your heads about politics"
prevent you from voting at election times?'

No one answered, and there ensued a brief silence.  Easton however, in
spite of the snub he had received, could not refrain from talking.

'Well, I don't go in for politics much, either, but if what's in this
'ere paper is true, it seems to me as we oughter take some interest in
it, when the country is being ruined by foreigners.'

'If you're going to believe all that's in that bloody rag you'll want
some salt,' said Harlow.

The Obscurer was a Tory paper and Harlow was a member of the local
Liberal club.  Harlow's remark roused Crass.

'Wot's the use of talkin' like that?' he said; 'you know very well that
the country IS being ruined by foreigners.  Just go to a shop to buy
something; look round the place an' you'll see that more than 'arf the
damn stuff comes from abroad.  They're able to sell their goods 'ere
because they don't 'ave to pay no dooty, but they takes care to put
'eavy dooties on our goods to keep 'em out of their countries; and I
say it's about time it was stopped.'

''Ear, 'ear,' said Linden, who always agreed with Crass, because the
latter, being in charge of the job, had it in his power to put in a
good--or a bad--word for a man to the boss.  ''Ear, 'ear!  Now that's
wot I call common sense.'

Several other men, for the same reason as Linden, echoed Crass's
sentiments, but Owen laughed contemptuously.

'Yes, it's quite true that we gets a lot of stuff from foreign
countries,' said Harlow, 'but they buys more from us than we do from
them.'

'Now you think you know a 'ell of a lot,' said Crass.  ''Ow much more
did they buy from us last year, than we did from them?'

Harlow looked foolish: as a matter of fact his knowledge of the subject
was not much wider than Crass's.  He mumbled something about not having
no 'ed for figures, and offered to bring full particulars next day.

'You're wot I call a bloody windbag,' continued Crass; 'you've got a
'ell of a lot to say, but wen it comes to the point you don't know
nothin'.'

'Why, even 'ere in Mugsborough,' chimed in Sawkins--who though still
lying on the dresser had been awakened by the shouting--'We're overrun
with 'em!  Nearly all the waiters and the cook at the Grand Hotel where
we was working last month is foreigners.'

'Yes,' said old Joe Philpot, tragically, 'and then thers all them
Hitalian horgin grinders, an' the blokes wot sells 'ot chestnuts; an'
wen I was goin' 'ome last night I see a lot of them Frenchies sellin'
hunions, an' a little wile afterwards I met two more of 'em comin' up
the street with a bear.'

Notwithstanding the disquieting nature of this intelligence, Owen again
laughed, much to the indignation of the others, who thought it was a
very serious state of affairs.  It was a dam' shame that these people
were allowed to take the bread out of English people's mouths: they
ought to be driven into the bloody sea.

And so the talk continued, principally carried on by Crass and those
who agreed with him.  None of them really understood the subject: not
one of them had ever devoted fifteen consecutive minutes to the earnest
investigation of it.  The papers they read were filled with vague and
alarming accounts of the quantities of foreign merchandise imported
into this country, the enormous number of aliens constantly arriving,
and their destitute conditions, how they lived, the crimes they
committed, and the injury they did to British trade.  These were the
seeds which, cunningly sown in their minds, caused to grow up within
them a bitter undiscriminating hatred of foreigners.  To them the
mysterious thing they variously called the 'Friscal Policy', the
'Fistical Policy', or the 'Fissical Question' was a great Anti-Foreign
Crusade.  The country was in a hell of a state, poverty, hunger and
misery in a hundred forms had already invaded thousands of homes and
stood upon the thresholds of thousands more.  How came these things to
be?  It was the bloody foreigner!  Therefore, down with the foreigners
and all their works.  Out with them.  Drive them b--s into the bloody
sea!  The country would be ruined if not protected in some way.  This
Friscal, Fistical, Fissical or whatever the hell policy it was called,
WAS Protection, therefore no one but a bloody fool could hesitate to
support it.  It was all quite plain--quite simple.  One did not need to
think twice about it.  It was scarcely necessary to think about it at
all.

This was the conclusion reached by Crass and such of his mates who
thought they were Conservatives--the majority of them could not have
read a dozen sentences aloud without stumbling--it was not necessary to
think or study or investigate anything.  It was all as clear as
daylight.  The foreigner was the enemy, and the cause of poverty and
bad trade.

When the storm had in some degree subsided,

'Some of you seem to think,' said Owen, sneeringly, 'that it was a
great mistake on God's part to make so many foreigners.  You ought to
hold a mass meeting about it: pass a resolution something like this:
"This meeting of British Christians hereby indignantly protests against
the action of the Supreme Being in having created so many foreigners,
and calls upon him to forthwith rain down fire, brimstone and mighty
rocks upon the heads of all those Philistines, so that they may be
utterly exterminated from the face of the earth, which rightly belongs
to the British people".'

Crass looked very indignant, but could think of nothing to say in
answer to Owen, who continued:

'A little while ago you made the remark that you never trouble yourself
about what you call politics, and some of the rest agreed with you that
to do so is not worth while.  Well, since you never "worry" yourself
about these things, it follows that you know nothing about them; yet
you do not hesitate to express the most decided opinions concerning
matters of which you admittedly know nothing. Presently, when there is
an election, you will go and vote in favour of a policy of which you
know nothing.  I say that since you never take the trouble to find out
which side is right or wrong you have no right to express any opinion.
You are not fit to vote.  You should not be allowed to vote.'

Crass was by this time very angry.

'I pays my rates and taxes,' he shouted, 'an' I've got as much right to
express an opinion as you 'ave.  I votes for who the bloody 'ell I
likes.  I shan't arst your leave nor nobody else's!  Wot the 'ell's it
got do with you who I votes for?'

'It has a great deal to do with me.  If you vote for Protection you
will be helping to bring it about, and if you succeed, and if
Protection is the evil that some people say is is, I shall be one of
those who will suffer.  I say you have no right to vote for a policy
which may bring suffering upon other people, without taking the trouble
to find out whether you are helping to make things better or worse.'

Owen had risen from his seat and was walking up and down the room
emphasizing his words with excited gestures.

'As for not trying to find out wot side is right,' said Crass, somewhat
overawed by Owen's manner and by what he thought was the glare of
madness in the latter's eyes, 'I reads the Ananias every week, and I
generally takes the Daily Chloroform, or the Hobscurer, so I ought to
know summat about it.'

'Just listen to this,' interrupted Easton, wishing to create a
diversion and beginning to read from the copy of the Obscurer which he
still held in his hand:

  'GREAT DISTRESS IN MUGSBOROUGH.
  HUNDREDS OUT OF EMPLOYMENT.
  WORK OF THE CHARITY SOCIETY.
  789 CASES ON THE BOOKS.

  'Great as was the distress among the working classes last year,
  unfortunately there seems every prospect that before the winter
  which has just commenced is over the distress will be even more
  acute.

  Already the Charity Society and kindred associations are relieving
  more cases than they did at the corresponding time last year.
  Applications to the Board of Guardians have also been much more
  numerous, and the Soup Kitchen has had to open its doors on Nov. 7th
  a fortnight earlier than usual.  The number of men, women and
  children provided with meals is three or four times greater than
  last year.'

Easton stopped: reading was hard work to him.

'There's a lot more,' he said, 'about starting relief works: two
shillings a day for married men and one shilling for single and
something about there's been 1,572 quarts of soup given to poor
families wot was not even able to pay a penny, and a lot more.  And
'ere's another thing, an advertisement:

  'THE SUFFERING POOR

  Sir: Distress among the poor is so acute that I earnestly ask you
  for aid for The Salvation Army's great Social work on their behalf.
  Some 600 are being sheltered nightly.  Hundreds are found work
  daily.  Soup and bread are distributed in the midnight hours to
  homeless wanderers in London.  Additional workshops for the
  unemployed have been established.  Our Social Work for men, women
  and children, for the characterless and the outcast, is the largest
  and oldest organized effort of its kind in the country, and greatly
  needs help.  L10,000 is required before Christmas Day.  Gifts may be
  made to any specific section or home, if desired.  Can you please
  send us something to keep the work going?  Please address cheques,
  crossed Bank of England (Law Courts Branch), to me at 101, Queen
  Victoria Street, EC.  Balance Sheets and Reports upon application.
          'BRAMWELL BOOTH.'

'Oh, that's part of the great 'appiness an' prosperity wot Owen makes
out Free Trade brings,' said Crass with a jeering laugh.

'I never said Free Trade brought happiness or prosperity,' said Owen.

'Well, praps you didn't say exactly them words, but that's wot it
amounts to.'

'I never said anything of the kind.  We've had Free Trade for the last
fifty years and today most people are living in a condition of more or
less abject poverty, and thousands are literally starving.  When we had
Protection things were worse still.  Other countries have Protection
and yet many of their people are glad to come here and work for
starvation wages.  The only difference between Free Trade and
Protection is that under certain circumstances one might be a little
worse that the other, but as remedies for Poverty, neither of them are
of any real use whatever, for the simple reason that they do not deal
with the real causes of Poverty.'

'The greatest cause of poverty is hover-population,' remarked Harlow.

'Yes,' said old Joe Philpot.  'If a boss wants two men, twenty goes
after the job: ther's too many people and not enough work.'

'Over-population!' cried Owen, 'when there's thousands of acres of
uncultivated land in England without a house or human being to be seen.
Is over-population the cause of poverty in France?  Is over-population
the cause of poverty in Ireland?  Within the last fifty years the
population of Ireland has been reduced by more than half.  Four
millions of people have been exterminated by famine or got rid of by
emigration, but they haven't got rid of poverty.  P'raps you think that
half the people in this country ought to be exterminated as well.'

Here Owen was seized with a violent fit of coughing, and resumed his
seat.  When the cough had ceased he sat wiping his mouth with his
handkerchief and listening to the talk that ensued.

'Drink is the cause of most of the poverty,' said Slyme.

This young man had been through some strange process that he called
'conversion'.  He had had a 'change of 'art' and looked down with pious
pity upon those he called 'worldly' people.  He  was not 'worldly', he
did not smoke or drink and never went to the theatre. He had an
extraordinary notion that total abstinence was one of the fundamental
principles of the Christian religion.  It never occurred to what he
called his mind, that this doctrine is an insult to the Founder of
Christianity.

'Yes,' said Crass, agreeing with Slyme, 'an' thers plenty of 'em wot's
too lazy to work when they can get it.  Some of the b--s who go about
pleading poverty 'ave never done a fair day's work in all their bloody
lives.  Then thers all this new-fangled machinery,' continued Crass.
'That's wot's ruinin' everything.  Even in our trade ther's them
machines for trimmin' wallpaper, an' now they've brought out a paintin'
machine.  Ther's a pump an' a 'ose pipe, an' they reckon two men can do
as much with this 'ere machine as twenty could without it.'

'Another thing is women,' said Harlow, 'there's thousands of 'em
nowadays doin' work wot oughter be done by men.'

'In my opinion ther's too much of this 'ere eddication, nowadays,'
remarked old Linden.  'Wot the 'ell's the good of eddication to the
likes of us?'

'None whatever,' said Crass, 'it just puts foolish idears into people's
'eds and makes 'em too lazy to work.'

Barrington, who took no part in the conversation, still sat silently
smoking.  Owen was listening to this pitiable farrago with feelings of
contempt and wonder.  Were they all hopelessly stupid?  Had their
intelligence never developed beyond the childhood stage?  Or was he mad
himself?

'Early marriages is another thing,' said Slyme: 'no man oughtn't to be
allowed to get married unless he's in a position to keep a family.'

'How can marriage be a cause of poverty?' said Owen, contemptuously. 'A
man who is not married is living an unnatural life.  Why don't you
continue your argument a little further and say that the practice of
eating and drinking is the cause of poverty or that if people were to
go barefoot and naked there would be no poverty?  The man who is so
poor that he cannot marry is in a condition of poverty already.'

'Wot I mean,' said Slyme, 'is that no man oughtn't to marry till he's
saved up enough so as to 'ave some money in the bank; an' another
thing, I reckon a man oughtn't to get married till 'e's got an 'ouse of
'is own.  It's easy enough to buy one in a building society if you're
in reg'lar work.'

At this there was a general laugh.

'Why, you bloody fool,' said Harlow, scornfully, 'most of us is walkin'
about 'arf our time.  It's all very well for you to talk; you've got
almost a constant job on this firm.  If they're doin' anything at all
you're one of the few gets a show in.  And another thing,' he added
with a sneer, 'we don't all go to the same chapel as old Misery,'

'Old Misery' was Ruston & Co.'s manager or walking foreman.  'Misery'
was only one of the nicknames bestowed upon him by the hands: he was
also known as 'Nimrod' and 'Pontius Pilate'.

'And even if it's not possible,' Harlow continued, winking at the
others, 'what's a man to do during the years he's savin' up?'

'Well, he must conquer hisself,' said Slyme, getting red.

'Conquer hisself is right!' said Harlow and the others laughed again.

'Of course if a man tried to conquer hisself by his own strength,'
replied Slyme, ''e would be sure to fail, but when you've got the Grace
of God in you it's different.'

'Chuck it, fer Christ's sake!' said Harlow in a tone of disgust. 'We've
only just 'ad our dinner!'

'And wot about drink?' demanded old Joe Philpot, suddenly.

''Ear, 'ear,' cried Harlow.  'That's the bleedin'  talk.  I wouldn't
mind 'avin 'arf a pint now, if somebody else will pay for it.'

Joe Philpot--or as he was usually called, 'Old Joe'--was in the habit
of indulging freely in the cup that inebriates.  He was not very old,
being only a little over fifty, but he looked much older.  He had lost
his wife some five years ago and was now alone in the world, for his
three children had died in their infancy.  Slyme's reference to drink
had roused Philpot's indignation; he felt that it was directed against
himself.  The muddled condition of his brain did not permit him to take
up the cudgels in his own behalf, but he knew that although Owen was a
tee-totaller himself, he disliked Slyme.

'There's no need for us to talk about drink or laziness,' returned
Owen, impatiently, 'because they have nothing to do with the matter.
The question is, what is the cause of the lifelong poverty of the
majority of those who are not drunkards and who DO work?  Why, if all
the drunkards and won't-works and unskilled or inefficient workers
could be by some miracle transformed into sober, industrious and
skilled workers tomorrow, it would, under the present conditions, be so
much the worse for us, because there isn't enough work for all NOW and
those people by increasing the competition for what work there is,
would inevitably cause a reduction of wages and a greater scarcity of
employment.  The theories that drunkenness, laziness or inefficiency
are the causes of poverty are so many devices invented and fostered by
those who are selfishly interested in maintaining the present states of
affairs, for the purpose of preventing us from discovering the real
causes of our present condition.'

'Well, if we're all wrong,' said Crass, with a sneer, 'praps you can
tell us what the real cause is?'

'An' praps you think you know how it's to be altered,' remarked Harlow,
winking at the others.

'Yes; I do think I know the cause,' declared Owen, 'and I do think I
know how it could be altered--'

'It can't never be haltered,' interrupted old Linden.  'I don't see no
sense in all this 'ere talk.  There's always been rich and poor in the
world, and there always will be.'

'Wot I always say is there 'ere,' remarked Philpot, whose principal
characteristic--apart from thirst--was a desire to see everyone
comfortable, and who hated rows of any kind.  'There ain't no use in
the likes of us trubblin our 'eds or quarrelin about politics.  It
don't make a dam bit of difference who you votes for or who gets in.
They're hall the same; workin the horicle for their own benefit.  You
can talk till you're black in the face, but you won't never be able to
alter it.  It's no use worrying.  The sensible thing is to try and make
the best of things as we find 'em: enjoy ourselves, and do the best we
can for each other.  Life's too short to quarrel and we'll hall soon be
dead!'

At the end of this lengthy speech, the philosophic Philpot abstractedly
grasped a jam-jar and raised it to his lips; but suddenly remembering
that it contained stewed tea and not beer, set it down again without
drinking.

'Let us begin at the beginning,' continued Owen, taking no notice of
these interruptions.  'First of all, what do you mean by Poverty?'

'Why, if you've got no money, of course,' said Crass impatiently.

The others laughed disdainfully.  It seemed to them such a foolish
question.

'Well, that's true enough as far as it goes,' returned Owen, 'that is,
as things are arranged in the world at present.  But money itself is
not wealth: it's of no use whatever.'

At this there was another outburst of jeering laughter.

'Supposing for example that you and Harlow were shipwrecked on a
desolate island, and YOU had saved nothing from the wreck but a bag
containing a thousand sovereigns, and he had a tin of biscuits and a
bottle of water.'

'Make it beer!' cried Harlow appealingly.

'Who would be the richer man, you or Harlow?'

'But then you see we ain't shipwrecked on no dissolute island at all,'
sneered Crass.  'That's the worst of your arguments.  You can't never
get very far without supposing some bloody ridclus thing or other.
Never mind about supposing things wot ain't true; let's 'ave facts and
common sense.'

''Ear, 'ear,' said old Linden.  'That's wot we want--a little common
sense.'

'What do YOU mean by poverty, then?' asked Easton.

'What I call poverty is when people are not able to secure for
themselves all the benefits of civilization; the necessaries, comforts,
pleasures and refinements of life, leisure, books, theatres, pictures,
music, holidays, travel, good and beautiful homes, good clothes, good
and pleasant food.'

Everybody laughed.  It was so ridiculous.  The idea of the likes of
THEM wanting or having such things!  Any doubts that any of them had
entertained as to Owen's sanity disappeared.  The man was as mad as a
March hare.

'If a man is only able to provide himself and his family with the bare
necessaries of existence, that man's family is living in poverty. Since
he cannot enjoy the advantages of civilization he might just as well be
a savage: better, in fact, for a savage knows nothing of what he is
deprived.  What we call civilization--the accumulation of knowledge
which has come down to us from our forefathers--is the fruit of
thousands of years of human thought and toil.  It is not the result of
the labour of the ancestors of any separate class of people who exist
today, and therefore it is by right the common heritage of all.  Every
little child that is born into the world, no matter whether he is
clever or full, whether he is physically perfect or lame, or blind; no
matter how much he may excel or fall short of his fellows in other
respects, in one thing at least he is their equal--he is one of the
heirs of all the ages that have gone before.'

Some of them began to wonder whether Owen was not sane after all.  He
certainly must be a clever sort of chap to be able to talk like this.
It sounded almost like something out of a book, and most of them could
not understand one half of it.

'Why is it,' continued Owen, 'that we are not only deprived of our
inheritance--we are not only deprived of nearly all the benefits of
civilization, but we and our children are also often unable to obtain
even the bare necessaries of existence?'

No one answered.

'All these things,' Owen proceeded, 'are produced by those who work. We
do our full share of the work, therefore we should have a full share of
the things that are made by work.'

The others continued silent.  Harlow thought of the over-population
theory, but decided not to mention it.  Crass, who could not have given
an intelligent answer to save his life, for once had sufficient sense
to remain silent.  He did think of calling out the patent paint-pumping
machine and bringing the hosepipe to bear on the subject, but abandoned
the idea; after all, he thought, what was the use of arguing with such
a fool as Owen?

Sawkins pretended to be asleep.

Philpot, however, had suddenly grown very serious.

'As things are now,' went on Owen, 'instead of enjoying the advantages
of civilization we are really worse off than slaves, for if we were
slaves our owners in their own interest would see to it that we always
had food and--'

'Oh, I don't see that,' roughly interrupted old Linden, who had been
listening with evident anger and impatience.  'You can speak for
yourself, but I can tell yer I don't put MYSELF down as a slave.'

'Nor me neither,' said Crass sturdily.  'Let them call their selves
slaves as wants to.'

At this moment a footstep was heard in the passage leading to the
kitchen.  Old Misery! or perhaps the bloke himself!  Crass hurriedly
pulled out his watch.

'Jesus Christ!' he gasped.  'It's four minutes past one!'

Linden frantically seized hold of a pair of steps and began wandering
about the room with them.

Sawkins scrambled hastily to his feet and, snatching a piece of
sandpaper from the pocket of his apron, began furiously rubbing down
the scullery door.

Easton threw down the copy of the Obscurer and scrambled hastily to his
feet.

The boy crammed the Chronicles of Crime into his trousers pocket.

Crass rushed over to the bucket and began stirring up the stale
whitewash it contained, and the stench which it gave forth was simply
appalling.

Consternation reigned.

They looked like a gang of malefactors suddenly interrupted in the
commission of a crime.

The door opened.  It was only Bundy returning from his mission to the
Bookie.



Chapter 2

Nimrod: a Mighty Hunter before the Lord


Mr Hunter, as he was called to his face and as he was known to his
brethren at the Shining Light Chapel, where he was superintendant of
the Sunday School, or 'Misery' or 'Nimrod'; as he was named behind his
back by the workmen over whom he tyrannized, was the general or walking
foreman or 'manager' of the firm whose card is herewith presented to
the reader:


                            RUSHTON & CO.
                             MUGSBOROUGH
                               -------
            Builders, Decorators, and General Contractors
                         FUNERALS FURNISHED
        Estimates given for General Repairs to House Property
              First-class Work only at Moderate Charges


There were a number of sub-foremen or 'coddies', but Hunter was THE
foreman.

He was a tall, thin man whose clothes hung loosely on the angles of his
round-shouldered, bony form.  His long, thin legs, about which the
baggy trousers draped in ungraceful folds, were slightly knock-kneed
and terminated in large, flat feet.  His arms were very long even for
such a tall man, and the huge, bony hands were gnarled and knotted.
When he removed his bowler hat, as he frequently did to wipe away with
a red handkerchief the sweat occasioned by furious bicycle riding, it
was seen that his forehead was high, flat and narrow.  His nose was a
large, fleshy, hawklike beak, and from the side of each nostril a deep
indentation extended downwards until it disappeared in the dropping
moustache that concealed his mouth, the vast extent of which was
perceived only when he opened it to bellow at the workmen his
exhortations to greater exertions.  His chin was large and
extraordinarily long.  The eyes were pale blue, very small and close
together, surmounted by spare, light-, almost invisible
eyebrows, with a deep vertical cleft between them over the nose.  His
head, covered with thick, coarse brown hair, was very large at the
back; the ears were small and laid close to the head.  If one were to
make a full-face drawing of his cadaverous visage it would be found
that the outline resembled that of the lid of a coffin.

This man had been with Rushton--no one had ever seen the 'Co.'--for
fifteen years, in fact almost from the time when the latter commenced
business.  Rushton had at that period realized the necessity of having
a deputy who could be used to do all the drudgery and running about so
that he himself might be free to attend to the more pleasant or
profitable matters.  Hunter was then a journeyman, but was on the point
of starting on his own account, when Rushton offered him a constant job
as foreman, two pounds a week, and two and a half per cent of the
profits of all work done.  On the face of it this appeared a generous
offer.  Hunter closed with it, gave up the idea of starting for
himself, and threw himself heart and mind into the business.  When an
estimate was to be prepared it was Hunter who measured up the work and
laboriously figured out the probably cost.  When their tenders were
accepted it was he who superintended the work and schemed how to scamp
it, where possible, using mud where mortar was specified, mortar where
there ought to have been cement, sheet zinc where they were supposed to
put sheet lead, boiled oil instead of varnish, and three coats of paint
where five were paid for.  In fact, scamping the work was with this man
a kind of mania.  It grieved him to see anything done properly.  Even
when it was more economical to do a thing well, he insisted from force
of habit on having it scamped.  Then he was almost happy, because he
felt that he was doing someone down.  If there were an architect
superintending the work, Misery would square him or bluff him.  If it
were not possible to do either, at least he had a try; and in the
intervals of watching, driving and bullying the hands, his vulture eye
was ever on the look out for fresh jobs.  His long red nose was thrust
into every estate agent's office in the town in the endeavour to smell
out what properties had recently changed hands or been let, in order
that he might interview the new owners and secure the order for
whatever alterations or repairs might be required.  He it was who
entered into unholy compacts with numerous charwomen and nurses of the
sick, who in return for a small commission would let him know when some
poor sufferer was passing away and would recommend Rushton & Co. to the
bereaved and distracted relatives.  By these means often--after first
carefully inquiring into the financial position of the stricken
family--Misery would contrive to wriggle his unsavoury carcass into the
house of sorrow, seeking, even in the chamber of death, to further the
interests of Rushton & Co. and to earn his miserable two and a half per
cent.

It was to make possible the attainment of this object that Misery
slaved and drove and schemed and cheated.  It was for this that the
workers' wages were cut down to the lowest possible point and their
offspring went ill clad, ill shod and ill fed, and were driven forth to
labour while they were yet children, because their fathers were unable
to earn enough to support their homes.

Fifteen years!

Hunter realized now that Rushton had had considerably the best of the
bargain.  In the first place, it will be seen that the latter had
bought over one who might have proved a dangerous competitor, and now,
after fifteen years, the business that had been so laboriously built
up, mainly by Hunter's energy, industry and unscrupulous cunning,
belonged to Rushton & Co.  Hunter was but an employee, liable to
dismissal like any other workman, the only difference being that he was
entitled to a week's notice instead of an hour's notice, and was but
little better off financially than when he started for the firm.

Fifteen years!

Hunter knew now that he had been used, but he also knew that it was too
late to turn back.  He had not saved enough to make a successful start
on his own account even if he had felt mentally and physically capable
of beginning all over again, and if Rushton were to discharge him right
now he was too old to get a job as a journeyman.  Further, in his zeal
for Rushton & Co. and his anxiety to earn his commission, he had often
done things that had roused the animosity of rival firms to such an
extent that it was highly improbable that any of them would employ him,
and even if they would, Misery's heart failed him at the thought of
having to meet on an equal footing those workmen whom he had tyrannized
over and oppressed.  It was for these reasons that Hunter was as
terrified of Rushton as the hands were of himself.

Over the men stood Misery, ever threatening them with dismissal and
their wives and children with hunger.  Behind Misery was Rushton, ever
bullying and goading him on to greater excesses and efforts for the
furtherance of the good cause--which was to enable the head of the firm
to accumulate money.

Mr Hunter, at the moment when the reader first makes his acquaintance
on the afternoon of the day when the incidents recorded in the first
chapter took place, was executing a kind of strategic movement in the
direction of the house where Crass and his mates were working.  He kept
to one side of the road because by so doing he could not be perceived
by those within the house until the instant of his arrival. When he was
within about a hundred yards of the gate he dismounted from his
bicycle, there being a sharp rise in the road just there, and as he
toiled up, pushing the bicycle in front, his breath showing in white
clouds in the frosty air, he observed a number of men hanging about.
Some of them he knew; they had worked for him at various times, but
were now out of a job.  There were five men altogether; three of them
were standing in a group, the other two stood each by himself, being
apparently strangers to each other and the first three. The three men
who stood together were nearest to Hunter and as the latter approached,
one of them advanced to meet him.

'Good afternoon, sir.'

Hunter replied by an inarticulate grunt, without stopping; the man
followed.

'Any chance of a job, sir?'

'Full up,' replied Hunter, still without stopping.  The man still
followed, like a beggar soliciting charity.

'Be any use calling in a day or so, sir?'

'Don't think so,' Hunter replied.  'Can if you like; but we're full up.'

'Thank you, sir,' said the man, and turned back to his friends.

By this time Hunter was within a few yards of one of the other two men,
who also came to speak to him.  This man felt there was no hope of
getting a job; still, there was no harm in asking.  Besides, he was
getting desperate.  It was over a month now since he had finished up
for his last employer.  It had been a very slow summer altogether.
Sometimes a fortnight for one firm; then perhaps a week doing nothing;
then three weeks or a month for another firm, then out again, and so
on.  And  now it was November.  Last winter they had got into debt;
that was nothing unusual, but owing to the bad summer they had not been
able, as in other years, to pay off the debts accumulated in winter.
It was doubtful, too, whether they would be able to get credit again
this winter.  In fact this morning when his wife sent their little girl
to the grocer's for some butter the latter had refused to let the child
have it without the money.  So although he felt it to be useless he
accosted Hunter.

This time Hunter stopped: he was winded by his climb up the hill.

'Good afternoon, sir.' Hunter did not return the salutation; he had not
the breath to spare, but the man was not hurt; he was used to being
treated like that.

'Any chance of a job, sir?'

Hunter did not reply at once.  He was short of breath and he was
thinking of a plan that was ever recurring to his mind, and which he
had lately been hankering to put into execution.  It seemed to him that
the long waited for opportunity had come.  Just now Rushton & Co. were
almost the only firm in Mugsborough who had any work.  There were
dozens of good workmen out.  Yes, this was the time.  If this man
agreed he would give him a start.  Hunter knew the man was a good
workman, he had worked for Rushton & Co. before.  To make room for him
old Linden and some other full-price man could be got rid of; it would
not be difficult to find some excuse.

'Well,' Hunter said at last in a doubtful, hesitating kind of way, 'I'm
afraid not, Newman.  We're about full up.'

He ceased speaking and remained waiting for the other to say something
more.  He did not look at the man, but stooped down, fidgeting with the
mechanism of the bicycle as if adjusting it.

'Things have been so bad this summer,' Newman went on.  'I've had
rather a rough time of it.  I would be very glad of a job even if it
was only for a week or so.'

There was a pause.  After a while, Hunter raised his eyes to the
other's face, but immediately let them fall again.

'Well,' said he, 'I might--perhaps--be able to let you have a day or
two.  You can come here to this job,' and he nodded his head in the
direction of the house where the men were working.  'Tomorrow at seven.
Of course you know the figure?' he added as Newman was about to thank
him.  'Six and a half.'

Hunter spoke as if the reduction were already an accomplished fact. The
man was more likely to agree, if he thought that others were already
working at the reduced rate.

Newman was taken by surprise and hesitated.  He had never worked under
price; indeed, he had sometimes gone hungry rather than do so; but now
it seemed that others were doing it.  And then he was so awfully hard
up.  If he refused this job he was not likely to get another in a
hurry.  He thought of his home and his family.  Already they owed five
weeks' rent, and last Monday the collector had hinted pretty plainly
that the landlord would not wait much longer.  Not only that, but if he
did not get a job how were they to live?  This morning he himself had
had no breakfast to speak of, only a cup of tea and some dry bread.
These thoughts crowded upon each other in his mind, but still he
hesitated.  Hunter began to move off.

'Well,' he said, 'if you like to start you can come here at seven in
the morning.'  Then as Newman still hesitated he added impatiently,
'Are you coming or not?'

'Yes, sir,' said Newman.

'All right,' said Hunter, affably.  'I'll tell Crass to have a kit
ready for you.'

He nodded in a friendly way to the man, who went off feeling like a
criminal.

As Hunter resumed his march, well pleased with himself, the fifth man,
who had been waiting all this time, came to meet him.  As he
approached, Hunter recognized him as one who had started work for
Rushton & Co early in the summer, but who had left suddenly of his own
accord, having taken offence at some bullying remark of Hunter's.

Hunter was glad to see this man.  He guessed that the fellow must be
very hard pressed to come again and ask for work after what had
happened.

'Any chance of a job, sir?'

Hunter appeared to reflect.

'I believe I have room for one,' he said at length.  'But you're such
an uncertain kind of chap.  You don't seem to care much whether you
work or not.  You're too independent, you know; one can't say two words
to you but you must needs clear off.'

The man made no answer.

'We can't tolerate that kind of thing, you know,' Hunter added.  'If we
were to encourage men of your stamp we should never know where we are.'

So saying, Hunter moved away and again proceeded on his journey.

When he arrived within about three yards of the gate he noiselessly
laid his machine against the garden fence.  The high evergreens that
grew inside still concealed him from the observation of anyone who
might be looking out of the windows of the house.  Then he carefully
crept along till he came to the gate post, and bending down, he
cautiously peeped round to see if he could detect anyone idling, or
talking, or smoking.  There was no one in sight except old Jack Linden,
who was rubbing down the lobby doors with pumice-stone and water.
Hunter noiselessly opened the gate and crept quietly along the grass
border of the garden path.  His idea was to reach the front door
without being seen, so that Linden could not give notice of his
approach to those within.  In this he succeeded and passed silently
into the house.  He did not speak to Linden; to do so would have
proclaimed his presence to the rest.  He crawled stealthily over the
house but was disappointed in his quest, for everyone he saw was hard
at work.  Upstairs he noticed that the door of one of the rooms was
closed.

Old Joe Philpot had been working in this room all day, washing off the
old whitewash from the ceiling and removing the old papers from the
walls with a broad bladed, square topped knife called a stripper.
Although it was only a small room, Joe had had to tear into the work
pretty hard all the time, for the ceiling seemed to have had two or
three coats of whitewash without ever having been washed off, and there
were several thicknesses of paper on the walls.  The difficulty of
removing these papers was increased by the fact that there was a dado
which had been varnished.  In order to get this off it had been
necessary to soak it several times with strong soda water, and although
Joe was as careful as possible he had not been able to avoid getting
some of this stuff on his fingers.  The result was that his nails were
all burnt and discoloured and the flesh round them cracked and
bleeding.  However, he had got it all off at last, and he was not
sorry, for his right arm and shoulder were aching from the prolonged
strain and in the palm of the right hand there was a blister as large
as a shilling, caused by the handle of the stripping knife.

All the old paper being off, Joe washed down the walls with water, and
having swept the paper into a heap in the middle of the floor, he mixed
with a small trowel some cement on a small board and proceeded to stop
up the cracks and holes in the walls and ceiling.  After a while,
feeling very tired, it occurred to him that he deserved a spell and a
smoke for five minutes.  He closed the door and placed a pair of steps
against it.  There were two windows in the room almost opposite each
other; these he opened wide in order that the smoke and smell of his
pipe might be carried away.  Having taken these precautions against
surprise, he ascended to the top of the step ladder that he had laid
against the door and sat down at ease.  Within easy reach was the top
of a cupboard where he had concealed a pint of beer in a bottle.  To
this he now applied himself.  Having taken a long pull at the bottle,
he tenderly replaced it on the top of the cupboard and proceeded to
'hinjoy' a quiet smoke, remarking to himself:

'This is where we get some of our own back.'

He held, however, his trowel in one hand, ready for immediate action in
case of interruption.

Philpot was about fifty-five years old.  He wore no white jacket, only
an old patched apron; his trousers were old, very soiled with paint and
ragged at the bottoms of the legs where they fell over the
much-patched, broken and down-at-heel boots.  The part of his waistcoat
not protected by his apron was covered with spots of dried paint.  He
wore a  shirt and a 'dickey' which was very soiled and covered
with splashes of paint, and one side of it was projecting from the
opening of the waistcoat.  His head was covered with an old cap, heavy
and shining with paint.  He was very thin and stooped slightly.
Although he was really only fifty-five, he looked much older, for he
was prematurely aged.

He had not been getting his own back for quite five minutes when Hunter
softly turned the handle of the lock.  Philpot immediately put out his
pipe and descending from his perch opened the door.  When Hunter
entered Philpot closed it again and, mounting the steps, went on
stripping the wall just above.  Nimrod looked at him suspiciously,
wondering why the door had been closed.  He looked all round the room
but could see nothing to complain of.  He sniffed the air to try if he
could detect the odour of tobacco, and if he had not been suffering a
cold in the head there is no doubt that he would have perceived it.
However, as it was he could smell nothing but all the same he was not
quite satisfied, although he remembered that Crass always gave Philpot
a good character.

'I don't like to have men working on a job like this with the door
shut,' he said at length.  'It always gives me the idear that the man's
'avin a mike.  You can do what you're doin' just as well with the door
open.'

Philpot, muttering something about it being all the same to him--shut
or open--got down from the steps and opened the door.  Hunter went out
again without making any further remark and once more began crawling
over the house.

Owen was working by himself in a room on the same floor as Philpot. He
was at the window, burning off with a paraffin torch-lamp those parts
of the old paintwork that were blistered and cracked.

In this work the flame of the lamp is directed against the old paint,
which becomes soft and is removed with a chisel knife, or a scraper
called a shavehook.  The door was ajar and he had opened the top sash
of the window for the purpose of letting in some fresh air, because the
atmosphere of the room was foul with the fumes of the lamp and the
smell of the burning paint, besides being heavy with moisture. The
ceiling had only just been water washed and the walls had just been
stripped.  The old paper, saturated with water, was piled up in a heap
in the middle of the floor.

Presently, as he was working he began to feel conscious of some other
presence in the room; he looked round.  The door was open about six
inches and in the opening appeared a long, pale face with a huge chin,
surmounted by a bowler hat and ornamented with a large red nose, a
drooping moustache and two small, glittering eyes set very close
together.  For some seconds this apparition regarded Owen intently,
then it was silently withdrawn, and he was again alone.  He had been so
surprised and startled that he had nearly dropped the lamp, and now
that the ghastly countenance was gone, Owen felt the blood surge into
his own cheeks.  He trembled with suppressed fury and longed to be able
to go out there on the landing and hurl the lamp into Hunter's face.

Meanwhile, on the landing outside Owen's door, Hunter stood thinking.
Someone must be got rid of to make room for the cheap man tomorrow. He
had hoped to catch somebody doing something that would have served as
an excuse for instant dismissal, but there was now no hope of that
happening.  What was to be done?  He would like to get rid of Linden,
who was now really too old to be of much use, but as the old man had
worked for Rushton on and off for many years, Hunter felt that he could
scarcely sack him off hand without some reasonable pretext. Still, the
fellow was really not worth the money  he was getting. Sevenpence an
hour was an absurdly large wage for an old man like him. It was
preposterous: he would have to go, excuse or no excuse.

Hunter crawled downstairs again.

Jack Linden was about sixty-seven years old, but like Philpot, and as
is usual with working men, he appeared older, because he had had to
work very hard all his life, frequently without proper food and
clothing.  His life had been passed in the midst of a civilization
which he had never been permitted to enjoy the benefits of.  But of
course he knew nothing about all this.  He had never expected or wished
to be allowed to enjoy such things; he had always been of opinion that
they were never intended for the likes of him.  He called himself a
Conservative and was very patriotic.

At the time when the Boer War commenced, Linden was an enthusiastic
jingo: his enthusiasm had been somewhat damped when his youngest son, a
reservist, had to go to the front, where he died of fever and exposure.
When this soldier son went away, he left his wife and two children,
aged respectively four and five years at that time, in his father's
care.  After he died they stayed on with the old people.  The young
woman earned a little occasionally by doing needlework, but was really
dependent on her father-in-law.  Notwithstanding his poverty, he was
glad to have them in the house, because of late years his wife had been
getting very feeble, and, since the shock occasioned by the news of the
death of her son, needed someone constantly with her.

Linden was still working at the vestibule doors when the manager came
downstairs.  Misery stood watching him for some minutes without
speaking.  At last he said loudly:

'How much longer are you going to be messing about those doors?  Why
don't you get them under colour?  You were fooling about there when I
was here this morning.  Do you think it'll pay to have you playing
about there hour after hour with a bit of pumice stone?  Get the work
done!  Or if you don't want to, I'll very soon find someone else who
does!  I've been noticing your style of doing things for some time past
and I want you to understand that you can't play the fool with me.
There's plenty of better men than you walking about.  If you can't do
more than you've been doing lately you can clear out; we can do without
you even when we're busy.'

Old Jack trembled.  He tried to answer, but was unable to speak.  If he
had been a slave and had failed to satisfy his master, the latter might
have tied him up somewhere and thrashed him.  Hunter could not do that;
he could only take his food away.  Old Jack was frightened--it was not
only HIS food that might be taken away.  At last, with a great effort,
for the words seemed to stick in his throat, he said:

'I must clean the work down, sir, before I go on painting.'

'I'm not talking about what you're doing, but the time it takes you to
do it!' shouted Hunter.  'And I don't want any back answers or argument
about it.  You must move yourself a bit quicker or leave it alone
altogether.'

Linden did not answer: he went on with his work, his hand trembling to
such an extent that he was scarcely able to hold the pumice stone.

Hunter shouted so loud that his voice filled all the house.  Everyone
heard and was afraid.  Who would be the next? they thought.

Finding that Linden made no further answer, Misery again began walking
about the house.

As he looked at them the men did their work in a nervous, clumsy, hasty
sort of way.  They made all sorts of mistakes and messes. Payne, the
foreman carpenter, was putting some new boards on a part of the
drawing-room floor: he was in such a state of panic that, while driving
a nail, he accidentally struck the thumb of his left hand a severe blow
with his hammer.  Bundy was also working in the drawing-room putting
some white-glazed tiles in the fireplace.  Whilst cutting one of these
in half in order to fit it into its place, he inflicted a deep gash on
one of his fingers.  He was afraid to leave off to bind it up while
Hunter was there, and consequently as he worked the white tiles became
all smeared and spattered with blood.  Easton, who was working with
Harlow on a plank, washing off the old distemper from the hall ceiling,
was so upset that he was scarcely able  to stand on the plank, and
presently the brush fell from his trembling hand with a crash upon the
floor.

Everyone was afraid.  They knew that it was impossible to get a job for
any other firm.  They knew that this man had the power to deprive them
of the means of earning a living; that he possessed the power to
deprive their children of bread.

Owen, listening to Hunter over the banisters upstairs, felt that he
would like to take him by the throat with one hand and smash his face
in with the other.

And then?

Why then he would be sent to gaol, or at the best he would lose his
employment: his food and that of his family would be taken away.  That
was why he only ground his teeth and cursed and beat the wall with his
clenched fist.  So! and so! and so!

If it were not for them!

Owen's imagination ran riot.

First he would seize him by the collar with his left hand, dig his
knuckles into his throat, force him up against the wall and then, with
his right fist, smash! smash! smash! until Hunter's face was all cut
and covered with blood.

But then, what about those at home?  Was it not braver and more manly
to endure in silence?

Owen leaned against the wall, white-faced, panting and exhausted.

Downstairs, Misery was still going to and fro in the house and walking
up and down in it.  Presently he stopped to look at Sawkins' work. This
man was painting the woodwork of the back staircase.  Although the old
paintwork here was very dirty and greasy, Misery had given orders that
it was not to be cleaned before being painted.

'Just dust it down and slobber the colour on,' he had said.
Consequently, when Crass made the paint, he had put into it an extra
large quantity of dryers.  To a certain extent this destroyed the
'body' of the colour: it did not cover well; it would require two
coats.  When Hunter perceived this he was furious.  He was sure it
could be made to do with one coat with a little care; he believed
Sawkins was doing it like this on purpose.  Really, these men seemed to
have no conscience.

Two coats! and he had estimated for only three.

'Crass!'

'Yes, sir.'

'Come here!'

'Yes, sir.'

Crass came hurrying along.

'What's the meaning of this?  Didn't I tell you to make this do with
one coat?  Look at it!'

'It's like this, sir,' said Crass.  'If it had been washed down--'

'Washed down be damned,' shouted Hunter.  'The reason is that the
colour ain't thick enough.  Take the paint and put a little more body
in it and we'll soon see whether it can be done or not.  I can make it
cover if you can't.'

Crass took the paint, and, superintended by Hunter, made it thicker.
Misery then seized the brush and prepared to demonstrate the
possibility of finishing the work with one coat.  Crass and Sawkins
looked on in silence.

Just as Misery was about to commence he fancied he heard someone
whispering somewhere.  He laid down the brush and crawled stealthily
upstairs to see who it was.  Directly his back was turned Crass seized
a bottle of oil that was standing near and, tipping about half a pint
of it into the paint, stirred it up quickly.  Misery returned almost
immediately: he had not caught anyone; it must have been fancy.  He
took up the brush and began to paint.  The result was worse than
Sawkins!

He messed and fooled about for some time, but could not make it come
right.  At last he gave it up.

'I suppose it'll have to have two coats after all,' he said,
mournfully.  'But it's a thousand pities.'

He almost wept.

The firm would be ruined if things went on like this.

'You'd better go on with it,' he said as he laid down the brush.

He began to walk about the house again.  He wanted to go away now, but
he did not want them to know that he was gone, so he sneaked out of the
back door, crept around the house and out of the gate, mounted his
bicycle and rode away.

No one saw him go.

For some time the only sounds that broke the silence were the noises
made by the hands as they worked.  The musical ringing of Bundy's
trowel, the noise of the carpenters' hammers and saws and the
occasional moving of a pair of steps.

No one dared to speak.

At last Philpot could stand it no longer.  He was very thirsty.

He had kept the door of his room open since Hunter arrived.

He listened intently.  He felt certain that Hunter must be gone: he
looked across the landing and could see Owen working in the front room.
Philpot made a little ball of paper and threw it at him to attract his
attention.  Owen looked round and Philpot began to make signals: he
pointed downwards with one hand and jerked the thumb of the other over
his shoulder in the direction of the town, winking grotesquely the
while.  This Owen interpreted to be an inquiry as to whether Hunter had
departed.  He shook his head and shrugged his shoulders to intimate
that he did not know.

Philpot cautiously crossed the landing and peeped furtively over the
banisters, listening breathlessly.  'Was it gorn or not?' he wondered.

He crept along on tiptoe towards Owen's room, glancing left and right,
the trowel in his hand, and looking like a stage murderer.  'Do you
think it's gorn?' he asked in a hoarse whisper when he reached Owen's
door.

'I don't know,' replied Owen in a low tone.

Philpot wondered.  He MUST have a drink, but it would never do for
Hunter to see him with the bottle: he must find out somehow whether he
was gone or not.

At last an idea came.  He would go downstairs to get some more cement.
Having confided this plan to Owen, he crept quietly back to the room in
which he had been working, then he walked noisily across the landing
again.

'Got a bit of stopping to spare, Frank?' he asked in a loud voice.

'No,' replied Owen.  'I'm not using it.'

'Then I suppose I'll have to go down and get some.  Is there anything I
can bring up for you?'

'No, thanks,' replied Owen.

Philpot marched boldly down to the scullery, which Crass had utilized
as a paint-shop.  Crass was there mixing some colour.

'I want a bit of stopping,' Philpot said as he helped himself to some.

'Is the b--r gorn?' whispered Crass.

'I don't know,' replied Philpot.  'Where's his bike?'

''E always leaves it outside the gate, so's we can't see it,' replied
Crass.

'Tell you what,' whispered Philpot, after a pause.  'Give the boy a
hempty bottle and let 'im go to the gate and look to the bikes there.
If Misery sees him 'e can pretend to be goin' to the shop for some
hoil.'

This was done.  Bert went to the gate and returned almost immediately:
the bike was gone.  As the good news spread through the house a chorus
of thanksgiving burst forth.

'Thank Gord!' said one.

'Hope the b--r falls orf and breaks 'is bloody neck,' said another.

'These Bible-thumpers are all the same; no one ever knew one to be any
good yet,' cried a third.

Directly they knew for certain that he was gone, nearly everyone left
off work for a few minutes to curse him.   Then they again went on
working and now that they were relieved of the embarrassment that
Misery's presence inspired, they made better progress.  A few of them
lit their pipes and smoked as they worked.

One of these was old Jack Linden.  He was upset by the bullying he had
received, and when he noticed some of the others smoking he thought he
would have a pipe; it might steady his nerves.  As a rule he did not
smoke when working; it was contrary to orders.

As Philpot was returning to work again he paused for a moment to
whisper to Linden, with the result that the latter accompanied him
upstairs.

On reaching Philpot's room the latter placed the step-ladder near the
cupboard and, taking down the bottle of beer, handed it to Linden with
the remark, 'Get some of that acrost yer, matey; it'll put yer right.'

While Linden was taking a hasty drink, Joe kept watch on the landing
outside in case Hunter should suddenly and unexpectedly reappear.

When Linden was gone downstairs again, Philpot, having finished what
remained of the beer and hidden the bottle up the chimney, resumed the
work of stopping up the holes and cracks in the ceiling and walls.  He
must make a bit of a show tonight or there would be a hell of a row
when Misery came in the morning.

Owen worked on in a disheartened, sullen way.  He felt like a beaten
dog.

He was more indignant on poor old Linden's account than on his own, and
was oppressed by a sense of impotence and shameful degradation.

All his life it had been the same: incessant work under similar more or
less humiliating conditions, and with no more result than being just
able to avoid starvation.

And the future, as far as he could see, was as hopeless as the past;
darker, for there would surely come a time, if he lived long enough,
when he would be unable to work any more.

He thought of his child.  Was he to be a slave and a drudge all his
life also?

It would be better for the boy to die now.

As Owen thought of his child's future there sprung up within him a
feeling of hatred and fury against the majority of his fellow workmen.

THEY WERE THE ENEMY.  Those who not only quietly submitted like so many
cattle to the existing state of things, but defended it, and opposed
and ridiculed any suggestion to alter it.

THEY WERE THE REAL OPPRESSORS--the men who spoke of themselves as 'The
likes of us,' who, having lived in poverty and degradation all their
lives considered that what had been good enough for them was good
enough for the children they had been the cause of bringing into
existence.

He hated and despised them because they calmly saw their children
condemned to hard labour and poverty for life, and deliberately refused
to make any effort to secure for them better conditions than those they
had themselves.

It was because they were indifferent to the fate of THEIR children that
he would be unable to secure a natural and human life for HIS. It was
their apathy or active opposition that made it impossible to establish
a better system of society under which those who did their fair share
of the world's work would be honoured and rewarded. Instead of helping
to do this, they abased themselves, and grovelled before their
oppressors, and compelled and taught their children to do the same.
THEY were the people who were really responsible for the continuance of
the present system.

Owen laughed bitterly to himself.  What a very comical system it was.

Those who worked were looked upon with contempt, and subjected to every
possible indignity.  Nearly everything they produced was taken away
from them and enjoyed by the people who did nothing.  And then the
workers bowed down and grovelled before those who had robbed them of
the fruits of their labour and were childishly grateful to them for
leaving anything at all.

No wonder the rich despised them and looked upon them as dirt.  They
WERE despicable.  They WERE dirt.  They admitted it and gloried in it.

While these thoughts were seething in Owen's mind, his fellow workmen
were still patiently toiling on downstairs.  Most of them had by this
time dismissed Hunter from their thoughts.  They did not take things so
seriously as Owen.  They flattered themselves that they had more sense
than that.  It could not be altered.  Grin and bear it.  After all, it
was only for life!  Make the best of things, and get your own back
whenever you get a chance.

Presently Harlow began to sing.  He had a good voice and it was a good
song, but his mates just then did not appreciate either one of the
other.  His singing was the signal for an outburst of exclamations and
catcalls.

'Shut it, for Christ's sake!'

'That's enough of that bloody row!'

And so on.  Harlow stopped.

'How's the enemy?' asked Easton presently, addressing no one in
particular.

'Don't know,' replied Bundy.  'It must be about half past four.  Ask
Slyme; he's got a watch.'

It was a quarter past four.

'It gets dark very early now,' said Easton.

'Yes,' replied Bundy.  'It's been very dull all day.  I think it's
goin' to rain.   Listen to the wind.'

'I 'ope not,' replied Easton.  'That means a wet shirt goin' 'ome.'

He called out to old Jack Linden, who was still working at the front
doors:

'Is it raining, Jack?'

Old Jack, his pipe still in his mouth, turned to look at the weather.
It was raining, but Linden did not see the large drops which splashed
heavily upon the ground.  He saw only Hunter, who was standing at the
gate, watching him.  For a few seconds the two men looked at each other
in silence.  Linden was paralysed with fear.  Recovering himself, he
hastily removed his pipe, but it was too late.

Misery strode up.

'I don't pay you for smoking,' he said, loudly.  'Make out your time
sheet, take it to the office and get your money.  I've had enough of
you!'

Jack made no attempt to defend himself: he knew it was of no use.  He
silently put aside the things he had been using, went into the room
where he had left his tool-bag and coat, removed his apron and white
jacket, folded them up and put them into his tool-bag along with the
tools he had been using--a chisel-knife and a shavehook--put on his
coat, and, with the tool-bag slung over his shoulder, went away from
the house.

Without speaking to anyone else, Hunter then hastily walked over the
place, noting what progress had been made by each man during his
absence.  He then rode away, as he wanted to get to the office in time
to give Linden his money.

It was now very cold and dark within the house, and as the gas was not
yet laid on, Crass distributed a number of candles to the men, who
worked silently, each occupied with his own gloomy thoughts.  Who would
be the next?

Outside, sombre masses of lead- clouds gathered ominously in
the tempestuous sky.  The gale roared loudly round the old-fashioned
house and the windows rattled discordantly.  Rain fell in torrents.

They said it meant getting wet through going home, but all the same,
Thank God it was nearly five o'clock!



Chapter 3

The Financiers


That night as Easton walked home through the rain he felt very
depressed.  It had been a very bad summer for most people and he had
not fared better than the rest.  A few weeks with one firm, a few days
with another, then out of a job, then on again for a month perhaps, and
so on.

William Easton was a man of medium height, about twenty-three years
old, with fair hair and moustache and blue eyes.  He wore a stand-up
collar with a  tie and his clothes, though shabby, were clean
and neat.

He was married: his wife was a young woman whose acquaintance he had
made when he happened to be employed with others painting the outside
of the house where she was a general servant.  They had 'walked out'
for about fifteen months.  Easton had been in no hurry to marry, for he
knew that, taking good times with bad, his wages did no average a pound
a week.  At the end of that time, however, he found that he could not
honourably delay longer, so they were married.

That was twelve months ago.

As a single man he had never troubled much if he happened to be out of
work; he always had enough to live on and pocket money besides; but now
that he was married it was different; the fear of being 'out' haunted
him all the time.

He had started for Rushton & Co. on the previous Monday after having
been idle for three weeks, and as the house where he was working had to
be done right through he had congratulated himself on having secured a
job that would last till Christmas; but he now began to fear that what
had befallen Jack Linden might also happen to himself at any time.  He
would have to be very careful not to offend Crass in any way.  He was
afraid the latter did not like him very much as it was. Easton knew
that Crass could get him the sack at any time, and would not scruple to
do so if he wanted to make room for some crony of his own.  Crass was
the 'coddy' or foreman of the job.  Considered as a workman he had no
very unusual abilities; he was if anything inferior to the majority of
his fellow workmen.  But although he had but little real ability he
pretended to know everything, and the vague references he was in the
habit of making to 'tones', and 'shades', and 'harmony', had so
impressed Hunter that the latter had a high opinion of him as a
workman.  It was by pushing himself forward in this way and by
judicious toadying to Hunter that Crass managed to get himself put in
charge of work.

Although Crass did as little work as possible himself he took care that
the others worked hard.  Any man who failed to satisfy him in this
respect he reported to Hunter as being 'no good', or 'too slow for a
funeral'.  The result was that this man was dispensed with at the end
of the week.  The men knew this, and most of them feared the wily Crass
accordingly, though there were a few whose known abilities placed them
to a certain extent above the reach of his malice.  Frank Owen was one
of these.

There were others who by the judicious administration of pipefuls of
tobacco and pints of beer, managed to keep in Crass's good graces and
often retained their employment when better workmen were 'stood off'.

As he walked home through the rain thinking of these things, Easton
realized that it was not possible to foresee what a day or even an hour
might bring forth.

By this time he had arrived at his home; it was a small house, one of a
long row of similar ones, and it contained altogether four rooms.

The front door opened into a passage about two feet six inches wide and
ten feet in length, covered with oilcloth.  At the end of the passage
was a flight of stairs leading to the upper part of the house. The
first door on the left led into the front sitting-room, an apartment
about nine feet square, with a bay window.  This room was very rarely
used and was always very tidy and clean.  The mantelpiece was of wood
painted black and ornamented with jagged streaks of red and yellow,
which were supposed to give it the appearance of marble. On the walls
was a paper with a pale terra-cotta ground and a pattern consisting of
large white roses with chocolate  leaves and stalks.

There was a small iron fender with fire-irons to match, and on the
mantelshelf stood a clock in a polished wood case, a pair of blue glass
vases, and some photographs in frames.  The floor was covered with
oilcloth of a tile pattern in yellow and red.  On the walls were two or
three framed  prints such as are presented with Christmas
numbers of illustrated papers.  There was also a photograph of a group
of Sunday School girls with their teachers with the church for the
background.  In the centre of the room was a round deal table about
three feet six inches across, with the legs stained red to look like
mahogany.  Against one wall was an old couch covered with faded
cretonne, four chairs to match standing backs to wall in different
parts of the room.  The table was covered with a red cloth with a
yellow crewel work design in the centre and in each of the four
corners, the edges being overcast in the same material.  On the table
were a lamp and a number of brightly bound books.

Some of these things, as the couch and the chairs, Easton had bought
second-hand and had done up himself.  The table, oilcloth, fender,
hearthrug, etc, had been obtained on the hire system and were not yet
paid for.  The windows were draped with white lace curtains and in the
bay was a small bamboo table on which reposed a large Holy Bible,
cheaply but showily bound.

If anyone had ever opened this book they would have found that its
pages were as clean as the other things in the room, and on the flyleaf
might have been read the following inscription: 'To dear Ruth, from her
loving friend Mrs Starvem with the prayer that God's word may be her
guide and that Jesus may be her very own Saviour.  Oct. 12. 19--'

Mrs Starvem was Ruth's former mistress, and this had been her parting
gift when Ruth left to get married.  It was supposed to be a keepsake,
but as Ruth never opened the book and never willingly allowed her
thoughts to dwell upon the scenes of which it reminded her, she had
forgotten the existence of Mrs Starvem almost as completely as that
well-to-do and pious lady had forgotten hers.

For Ruth, the memory of the time she spent in the house of 'her loving
friend' was the reverse of pleasant.  It comprised a series of
recollections of petty tyrannies, insults and indignities.  Six years
of cruelly excessive work, beginning every morning two or three hours
before the rest of the household were awake and ceasing only when she
went exhausted to bed, late at night.

She had been what is called a 'slavey' but if she had been really a
slave her owner would have had some regard for her health and welfare:
her 'loving friend' had had none.  Mrs Starvem's only thought had been
to get out of Ruth the greatest possible amount of labour and to give
her as little as possible in return.

When Ruth looked back upon that dreadful time she saw it, as one might
say, surrounded by a halo of religion.  She never passed by a chapel or
heard the name of God, or the singing of a hymn, without thinking of
her former mistress.  To have looked into this Bible would have
reminded her of Mrs Starvem; that was one of the reasons why the book
reposed, unopened and unread, a mere ornament on the table in the bay
window.

The second door in the passage near the foot of the stairs led into the
kitchen or living-room: from here another door led into the scullery.
Upstairs were two bedrooms.

As Easton entered the house, his wife met him in the passage and asked
him not to make a noise as the child had just gone to sleep.  They
kissed each other and she helped him to remove his wet overcoat.  Then
they both went softly into the kitchen.

This room was about the same size as the sitting-room.  At one end was
a small range with an oven and a boiler, and a high mantelpiece painted
black.  On the mantelshelf was a small round alarm clock and some
brightly polished tin canisters.  At the other end of the room, facing
the fireplace, was a small dresser on the shelves of which were neatly
arranged a number of plates and dishes.  The walls were papered with
oak paper.  On one wall, between two  almanacks, hung a tin
lamp with a reflector behind the light.  In the middle of the room was
an oblong deal table with a white tablecloth upon which the tea things
were set ready.  There were four kitchen chairs, two of which were
placed close to the table.  Overhead, across the room, about eighteen
inches down from the ceiling, were stretched several cords upon which
were drying a number of linen or calico undergarments, a 
shirt, and Easton's white apron and jacket.  On the back of a chair at
one side of the fire more clothes were drying.  At the other side on
the floor was a wicker cradle in which a baby was sleeping. Nearby
stood a chair with a towel hung on the back, arranged so as to shade
the infant's face from the light of the lamp.  An air of homely comfort
pervaded the room; the atmosphere was warm, and the fire blazed
cheerfully over the whitened hearth.

They walked softly over and stood by the cradle side looking at the
child; as they looked the baby kept moving uneasily in its sleep.  Its
face was very flushed and its eyes were moving under the half-closed
lids.  Every now and again its lips were drawn back slightly, showing
part of the gums; presently it began to whimper, drawing up its knees
as if in pain.

'He seems to have something wrong with him,' said Easton.

'I think it's his teeth,' replied the mother.  'He's been very restless
all day and he was awake nearly all last night.'

'P'r'aps he's hungry.'

'No, it can't be that.  He had the best part of an egg this morning and
I've nursed him several times today.  And then at dinner-time he had a
whole saucer full of fried potatoes with little bits of bacon in it.'

Again the infant whimpered and twisted in its sleep, its lips drawn
back showing the gums: its knees pressed closely to its body, the
little fists clenched, and face flushed.  Then after a few seconds it
became placid: the mouth resumed its usual shape; the limbs relaxed and
the child slumbered peacefully.

'Don't you think he's getting thin?' asked Easton.  'It may be fancy,
but he don't seem to me to be as big now as he was three months ago.'

'No, he's not quite so fat,' admitted Ruth.  'It's his teeth what's
wearing him out; he don't hardly get no rest at all with them.'

They continued looking at him a little longer.  Ruth thought he was a
very beautiful child: he would be eight months old on Sunday.  They
were sorry they could do nothing to ease his pain, but consoled
themselves with the reflection that he would be all right once those
teeth were through.

'Well, let's have some tea,' said Easton at last.

Whilst he removed his wet boots and socks and placed them in front of
the fire to dry and put on dry socks and a pair of slippers in their
stead, Ruth half filled a tin basin with hot water from the boiler and
gave it to him, and he then went to the scullery, added some cold water
and began to wash the paint off his hands.  This done he returned to
the kitchen and sat down at the table.

'I couldn't think what to give you to eat tonight,' said Ruth as she
poured out the tea.  'I hadn't got no money left and there wasn't
nothing in the house except bread and butter and that piece of cheese,
so I cut some bread and butter and put some thin slices of cheese on it
and toasted it on a place in front of the fire.  I hope you'll like it:
it was the best I could do.'

'That's all right: it smells very nice anyway, and I'm very hungry.'

As they were taking their tea Easton told his wife about Linden's
affair and his apprehensions as to what might befall himself.  They
were both very indignant, and sorry for poor old Linden, but their
sympathy for him was soon forgotten in their fears for their own
immediate future.

They remained at the table in silence for some time: then,

'How much rent do we owe now?' asked Easton.

'Four weeks, and I promised the collector the last time he called that
we'd pay two weeks next Monday.  He was quite nasty about it.'

'Well, I suppose you'll have to pay it, that's all,' said Easton.

'How much money will you have tomorrow?' asked Ruth.

He began to reckon up his time: he started on Monday and today was
Friday: five days, from seven to five, less half an hour for breakfast
and an hour for dinner, eight and a half hours a day--forty-two hours
and a half.  At sevenpence an hour that came to one pound four and
ninepence halfpenny.

'You know I only started on Monday,' he said, 'so there's no back day
to come.  Tomorrow goes into next week.'

'Yes, I know,' replied Ruth.

'If we pay the two week's rent that'll leave us twelve shillings to
live on.'

'But we won't be able to keep all of that,' said Ruth, 'because there's
other things to pay.'

'What other things?'

'We owe the baker eight shillings for the bread he let us have while
you were not working, and there's about twelve shillings owing for
groceries.  We'll have to pay them something on account.  Then we want
some more coal; there's only about a shovelful left, and--'

'Wait a minnit,' said Easton.  'The best way is to write out a list of
everything we owe; then we shall know exactly where we are.  You get me
a piece of paper and tell me what to write.  Then we'll see what it all
comes to.'

'Do you mean everything we owe, or everything we must pay tomorrow.'

'I think we'd better make a list of all we owe first.'

While they were talking the baby was sleeping restlessly, occasionally
uttering plaintive little cries.  The mother now went and knelt at the
side of the cradle, which she gently rocked with one hand, patting the
infant with the other.

'Except the furniture people, the biggest thing we owe is the rent,'
she said when Easton was ready to begin.

'It seems to me,' said he, as, after having cleared a space on the
table and arranged the paper, he began to sharpen his pencil with a
table-knife, 'that you don't manage things as well as you might.  If
you was to make a list of just the things you MUST have before you went
out of a Saturday, you'd find the money would go much farther. Instead
of doing that you just take the money in your hand without knowing
exactly what you're going to do with it, and when you come back it's
all gone and next to nothing to show for it.'

His wife made no reply: her head was bent over the child.

'Now, let's see,' went on her husband.  'First of all there's the rent.
How much did you say we owe?'

'Four weeks.  That's the three weeks you were out and this week.'

'Four sixes is twenty-four; that's one pound four,' said Easton as he
wrote it down.  'Next?'

'Grocer, twelve shillings.'

Easton looked up in astonishment.

'Twelve shillings.  Why, didn't you tell me only the other day that
you'd paid up all we owed for groceries?'

'Don't you remember we owed thirty-five shillings last spring?  Well,
I've been paying that bit by bit all the summer.  I paid the last of it
the week you finished your last job.  Then you were out three weeks--up
till last Friday--and as we had nothing in hand I had to get what we
wanted without paying for it.'

'But do you mean to say it cost us three shillings a week for tea and
sugar and butter?'

'It's not only them.  There's been bacon and eggs and cheese and other
things.'

The man was beginning to become impatient.

'Well,' he said, 'What else?'

'We owe the baker eight shillings.  We did owe nearly a pound, but I've
been paying it off a little at a time.'

This was added to the list.

'Then there's the milkman.  I've not paid him for four weeks.  He
hasn't sent a bill yet, but you can reckon it up; we have two penn'orth
every day.'

'That's four and eight,' said Easton, writing it down.  'Anything else?'

'One and seven to the greengrocer for potatoes, cabbage, and paraffin
oil.'

'Anything else?'

'We owe the butcher two and sevenpence.'

'Why, we haven't had any meat for a long time,' said Easton.  'When was
it?'

'Three weeks ago; don't you remember?  A small leg of mutton,'

'Oh, yes,' and he added the item.

'Then there's the instalments for the furniture and oilcloth--twelve
shillings.   A letter came from them today.  And there's something
else.'

She took three letters from the pocket of her dress and handed them to
him.

'They all came today.  I didn't show them to you before as I didn't
want to upset you before you had your tea.'

Easton drew the first letter from its envelope.

                        CORPORATION OF MUGSBOROUGH
                    General District and Special Rates
                               FINAL NOTICE

  MR W. EASTON,

  I have to remind you that the amount due from you as under, in
  respect of the above Rates, has not been paid, and to request that
  you will forward the same within Fourteen Days from this date.  You
  are hereby informed that after this notice no further call will be
  made, or intimation given, before legal proceedings are taken to
  enforce payment.
                                       By order of the Council.
                                                          JAMES LEAH.
                                           Collector, No. 2 District.
          District Rate .......................... L- 13 11
          Special Rate ...........................    10  2
                                                   ________
                                                   L1  4  1

The second communication was dated from the office of the Assistant
Overseer of the Poor.  It was also a Final Notice and was worded in
almost exactly the same way as the other, the principal difference
being that it was 'By order of the Overseers' instead of 'the Council'.
It demanded the sum of £1 1s 5-1/2d for Poor Rate within fourteen days,
and threatened legal proceedings in default.

Easton laid this down and began to read the third letter--

                           J. DIDLUM & CO LTD.
                        Complete House Furnishers
                       QUALITY STREET, MUGSBOROUGH

  MR W. EASTON,

  SIR:
  We have to remind you that three monthly payments of four shillings
  each (12/- in all) became due on the first of this month, and we
  must request you to let us have this amount BY RETURN OF POST.

  Under the terms of your agreement you guaranteed that the money
  should be paid on the Saturday of every fourth week.  To prevent
  unpleasantness, we must request you for the future to forward the
  full amount punctually upon that day.

                                              Yours truly,
                                           J. DIDLUM & CO. LTD

He read these communications several times in silence and finally with
an oath threw them down on the table.

'How much do we still owe for the oilcloth and the furniture?' he asked.

'I don't know exactly.  It was seven pound odd, and we've had the
things about six months.  We paid one pound down and three or four
instalments.  I'll get the card if you like.'

'No; never mind.  Say we've paid one pound twelve; so we still owe
about six pound.'

He added this amount to the list.

'I think it's a great pity we ever had the things at all,' he said,
peevishly.  'It would have been better to have gone without until we
could pay cash for them: but you would have your way, of course.  Now
we'll have this bloody debt dragging on us for years, and before the
dam stuff is paid for it'll be worn out.'

The woman did not reply at once.  She was bending down over the cradle
arranging the coverings which the restless movements of the child had
disordered.  She was crying silently, unnoticed by her husband.

For months past--in fact ever since the child was born--she had been
existing without sufficient food.  If Easton was unemployed they had to
stint themselves so as to avoid getting further into debt than was
absolutely necessary.  When he was working they had to go short in
order to pay what they owed; but of what there was Easton himself,
without knowing it, always had the greater share.  If he was at work
she would pack into his dinner basket overnight the best there was in
the house.  When he was out of work she often pretended, as she gave
him his meals, that she had had hers while he was out.  And all the
time the baby was draining her life away and her work was never done.

She felt very weak and weary as she crouched there, crying furtively
and trying not to let him see.

At last she said, without looking round:

'You know quite well that you were just as much in favour of getting
them as I was.  If we hadn't got the oilcloth there would have been
illness in the house because of the way the wind used to come up
between the floorboards.  Even now of a windy day the oilcloth moves up
and down.'

'Well, I'm sure I don't know,' said Easton, as he looked alternatively
at the list of debts and the three letters.  'I give you nearly every
farthing I earn and I never interfere about anything, because I think
it's your part to attend to the house, but it seems to me you don't
manage things properly.'

The woman suddenly burst into a passion of weeping, laying her head on
the seat of the chair that was standing near the cradle.

Easton started up in surprise.

'Why, what's the matter?' he said.

Then as he looked down upon the quivering form of the sobbing woman, he
was ashamed.  He knelt down by her, embracing her and apologizing,
protesting that he had not meant to hurt her like that.

'I always do the best I can with the money,' Ruth sobbed.  'I never
spend a farthing on myself, but you don't seem to understand how hard
it is.  I don't care nothing about having to go without things myself,
but I can't bear it when you speak to me like you do lately.  You seem
to blame me for everything.  You usen't to speak to me like that before
I--before--Oh, I am so tired--I am so tired, I wish I could lie down
somewhere and sleep and never wake up any more.'

She turned away from him, half kneeling, half sitting on the floor, her
arms folded on the seat of the chair, and her head resting upon them.
She was crying in a heartbroken helpless way.

'I'm sorry I spoke to you like that,' said Easton, awkwardly.  'I
didn't mean what I said.  It's all my fault.  I leave things too much
to you, and it's more than you can be expected to manage.  I'll help
you to think things out in future; only forgive me, I'm very sorry.  I
know you try your best.'

She suffered him to draw her to him, laying her head on his shoulder as
he kissed and fondled her, protesting that he would rather be poor and
hungry with her than share riches with anyone else.

The child in the cradle--who had been twisting and turning restlessly
all this time--now began to cry loudly.  The mother took it from the
cradle and began to hush and soothe it, walking about the room and
rocking it in her arms.  The child, however, continued to scream, so
she sat down to nurse it: for a little while the infant refused to
drink, struggling and kicking in its mother's arms, then for a few
minutes it was quite, taking the milk in a half-hearted, fretful way.
Then it began to scream and twist and struggle.

They both looked at it in a helpless manner.  Whatever could be the
matter with it?  It must be those teeth.

Then suddenly as they were soothing and patting him, the child vomited
all over its own and its mother's clothing a mass of undigested food.
Mingled with the curdled milk were fragments of egg, little bits of
bacon, bread and particles of potato.

Having rid his stomach of this unnatural burden, the unfortunate baby
began to cry afresh, his face very pale, his lips colourless, and his
eyes red-rimmed and running with water.

Easton walked about with him while Ruth cleaned up the mess and got
ready some fresh clothing.  They both agreed that it was the coming
teeth that had upset the poor child's digestion.  It would be a good
job when they were through.

This work finished, Easton, who was still convinced in his own mind
that with the aid of a little common sense and judicious management
their affairs might be arranged more satisfactorily, said:

'We may as well make a list of all the things we must pay and buy
tomorrow.  The great thing is to think out exactly what you are going
to do before you spend anything; that saves you from getting things you
don't really need and prevents you forgetting the things you MUST have.
Now, first of all, the rent; two weeks, twelve shillings.'

He took a fresh piece of paper and wrote this item down.

'What else is there that we must pay or buy tomorrow?'

'Well, you know I promised the baker and the grocer that I would begin
to pay them directly you got a job, and if I don't keep my word they
won't let us have anything another time, so you'd better put down two
shillings each for them.

'I've got that,' said Easton.

'Two and seven for the butcher.  We must pay that.  I'm ashamed to pass
the shop, because when I got the meat I promised to pay him the next
week, and it's nearly three weeks ago now.'

'I've put that down.  What else?'

'A hundred of coal: one and six.'

'Next?'

'The instalment for the furniture and floor-cloth, twelve shillings.'

'Next?'

'We owe the milkman four weeks; we'd better pay one week on account;
that's one and two.'

'Next?'

'The greengrocer; one shilling on account.'

'Anything else?'

'We shall want a piece of meat of some kind; we've had none for nearly
three weeks.  You'd better say one and six for that.'

'That's down.'

'One and nine for bread; that's one loaf a day.'

'But I've got two shillings down for bread already,' said Easton.

'Yes, I know, dear, but that's to go towards paying off what we owe,
and what you have down for the grocer and milkman's the same.'

'Well, go on, for Christ's sake, and let's get it down,' said Easton,
irritably.

'We can't say less than three shillings for groceries.'

Easton looked carefully at his list.  This time he felt sure that the
item was already down; but finding he was mistaken he said nothing and
added the amount.

'Well, I've got that.  What else?'

'Milk, one and two.'

'Next?'

'Vegetables, eightpence.'

'Yes.'

'Paraffin oil and firewood, sixpence.'

Again the financier scrutinized the list.  He was positive that it was
down already.  However, he could not find it, so the sixpence was added
to the column of figures.

'Then there's your boots; you can't go about with them old things in
this weather much longer, and they won't stand mending again.  You
remember the old man said they were not worth it when you had that
patch put on a few weeks ago.'

'Yes.  I was thinking of buying a new pair tomorrow.  My socks was wet
through tonight.  If it's raining some morning when I'm going out and I
have to work all day with wet feet I shall be laid up.'

'At that second-hand shop down in High Street I saw when I was out this
afternoon a very good pair just your size, for two shillings.'

Easton did not reply at once.  He did not much fancy wearing the
cast-off boots of some stranger, who for all he knew might have
suffered from some disease, but then remembering that his old ones were
literally falling off his feet he realized that he had practically no
choice.

'If you're quite sure they'll fit you'd better get them.  It's better
to do that than for me to catch cold and be laid up for God knows how
long.'

So the two shillings were added to the list.

'Is there anything else?'

'How much does it all come to now?' asked Ruth.

Easton added it all up.  When he had finished he remained staring at
the figures in consternation for a long time without speaking.

'Jesus Christ!' he ejaculated at last.

'What's it come to?' asked Ruth.

'Forty-four and tenpence.'

'I knew we wouldn't have enough,' said Ruth, wearily.  'Now if you
think I manage so badly, p'raps you can tell me which of these things
we ought to leave out.'

'We'd be all right if it wasn't for the debts,' said Easton, doggedly.

'When you're not working, we must either get into debt or starve.'

Easton made no answer.

'What'll we do about the rates?' asked Ruth.

'I'm sure I don't know: there's nothing left to pawn except my black
coat and vest.  You might get something on that.'

'It'll have to be paid somehow,' said Ruth, 'or you'll be taken off to
jail for a month, the same as Mrs Newman's husband was last winter.'

'Well, you'd better take the coat and vest and see what you can get on
'em tomorrow.'

'Yes,' said Ruth; 'and there's that brown silk dress of mine--you know,
the one I wore when we was married--I might get something on that,
because we won't get enough on the coat and vest.  I don't like parting
with the dress, although I never wear it; but we'll be sure to be able
to get it out again, won't we?'

'Of course,' said Easton.

They remained silent for some time, Easton staring at the list of debts
and the letters.  She was wondering if he still thought she managed
badly, and what he would do about it.  She knew she had always done her
best.  At last she said, wistfully, trying to speak plainly for there
seemed to be a lump in her throat: 'And what about tomorrow? Would you
like to spend the money yourself, or shall I manage as I've done
before, or will you tell me what to do?'

'I don't know, dear,' said Easton, sheepishly.  'I think you'd better
do as you think best.'

'Oh, I'll manage all right, dear, you'll see,' replied Ruth, who seemed
to think it a sort of honour to be allowed to starve herself and wear
shabby clothes.

The baby, who had been for some time quietly sitting upon his mother's
lap, looking wonderingly at the fire--his teeth appeared to trouble him
less since he got rid of the eggs and bacon and potatoes--now began to
nod and doze, which Easton perceiving, suggested that the infant should
not be allowed to go to sleep with an empty stomach, because it would
probably wake up hungry in the middle of the night. He therefore woke
him up as much as possible and mashed a little of the bread and toasted
cheese with a little warm milk.  Then taking the baby from Ruth he
began to try to induce it to eat.  As soon, however, as the child
understood his object, it began to scream at the top of its voice,
closing its lips firmly and turning its head rapidly from side to side
every time the spoon approached its mouth.  It made such a dreadful
noise that Easton at last gave in.  He began to walk about the room
with it, and presently the child sobbed itself to sleep. After putting
the baby into its cradle Ruth set about preparing Easton's breakfast
and packing it into his basket.  This did not take very long, there
being only bread and butter--or, to be more correct, margarine.

Then she poured what tea was left in the tea-pot into a small saucepan
and placed it on the top of the oven, but away from the fire, cut two
more slices of bread and spread on them all the margarine that was
left; then put them on a plate on the table, covering them with a
saucer to prevent them getting hard and dry during the night.  Near the
plate she placed a clean cup and saucer and the milk and sugar.

In the morning Easton would light the fire and warm up the tea in the
saucepan so as to have a cup of tea before going out.  If Ruth was
awake and he was not pressed for time, he generally took a cup of tea
to her in bed.

Nothing now remained to be done but to put some coal and wood ready in
the fender so that there would be no unnecessary delay in the morning.

The baby was still sleeping and Ruth did not like to wake him up yet to
dress him for the night.  Easton was sitting by the fire smoking, so
everything being done, Ruth sat down at the table and began sewing.
Presently she spoke:

'I wish you'd let me try to let that back room upstairs: the woman next
door has got hers let unfurnished to an elderly woman and her husband
for two shillings a week.  If we could get someone like that it would
be better than having an empty room in the house.'

'And we'd always have them messing about down here, cooking and washing
and one thing and another,' objected Easton; 'they'd be more trouble
than they way worth.'

'Well, we might try and furnish it.  There's Mrs Crass across the road
has got two lodgers in one room.  They pay her twelve shillings a week
each; board, lodging and washing.  That's one pound four she has coming
in reglar every week.  If we could do the same we'd very soon be out of
debt.'

'What's the good of talking?  You'd never be able to do the work even
if we had the furniture.'

'Oh, the work's nothing,' replied Ruth, 'and as for the furniture,
we've got plenty of spare bedclothes, and we could easily manage
without a washstand in our room for a bit, so the only thing we really
want is a small bedstead and mattress; we could get them very cheap
second-hand.'

'There ought to be a chest of drawers,' said Easton doubtfully.

'I don't think so,' replied Ruth.  'There's a cupboard in the room and
whoever took it would be sure to have a box.'

'Well, if you think you can do the work I've no objection,' said
Easton.  'It'll be a nuisance having a stranger in the way all the
time, but I suppose we must do something of the sort or else we'll have
to give up the house and take a couple of rooms somewhere.  That would
be worse than having lodgers ourselves.

'Let's go and have a look at the room,' he added, getting up and taking
the lamp from the wall.

They had to go up two flights of stairs before arriving at the top
landing, where there were two doors, one leading into the front
room--their bedroom--and the other into the empty back room.  These two
doors were at right angles to each other.  The wallpaper in the back
room was damaged and soiled in several places.

'There's nearly a whole roll of this paper on the top of the cupboard,'
said Ruth.  'You could easily mend all those places.  We could hang up a
few almanacks on the walls; our washstand could go there by the window;
a chair just there, and the bed along that wall behind the door.  It's
only a small window, so I could easily manage to make a curtain out of
something.  I'm sure I could make the room look quite nice without
spending hardly anything.'

Easton reached down the roll of paper.  It was the same pattern as that
on the wall.  The latter was a good deal faded, of course, but it would
not matter much if the patches showed a little.  They returned to the
kitchen.

'Do you think you know anyone who would take it?' asked Ruth.  Easton
smoked thoughtfully.

'No,' he said at length.  'But I'll mention it to one or two of the
chaps on the job; they might know of someone.'

'And I'll get Mrs Crass to ask her lodgers: p'raps they might have a
friend what would like to live near them.'

So it was settled; and as the fire was nearly out and it was getting
late, they prepared to retire for the night.  The baby was still
sleeping so Easton lifted it, cradle and all, and carried it up the
narrow staircase into the front bedroom, Ruth leading the way, carrying
the lamp and some clothes for the child.  So that the infant might be
within easy reach of its mother during the night, two chairs were
arranged close to her side of the bed and the cradle placed on them.

'Now we've forgot the clock,' said Easton, pausing.  He was half
undressed and had already removed his slippers.

'I'll slip down and get it,' said Ruth.

'Never mind, I'll go,' said Easton, beginning to put his slippers on
again.

'No, you get into bed.  I've not started undressing yet.  I'll get it,'
replied Ruth who was already on her way down.

'I don't know as it was worth the trouble of going down,' said Ruth
when she returned with the clock.  'It stopped three or four times
today.'

'Well, I hope it don't stop in the night,' Easton said.  'It would be a
bit of all right not knowing what time it was in the morning.  I
suppose the next thing will be that we'll have to buy a new clock.'

He woke several times during the night and struck a match to see if it
was yet time to get up.  At half past two the clock was still going and
he again fell asleep.  The next time he work up the ticking had ceased.
He wondered what time it was?  It was still very dark, but that was
nothing to go by, because it was always dark at six now.  He was wide
awake: it must be nearly time to get up.  It would never do to be late;
he might get the sack.

He got up and dressed himself.  Ruth was asleep, so he crept quietly
downstairs, lit the fire and heated the tea.  When it was ready he went
softly upstairs again.  Ruth was still sleeping, so he decided not to
disturb her.  Returning to the kitchen, he poured out and drank a cup
of tea, put on his boots, overcoat and hat and taking his basket went
out of the house.

The rain was still falling and it was very cold and dark.  There was no
one else in the street.  Easton shivered as he walked along wondering
what time it could be.  He remembered there was a clock over the front
of a jeweller's shop a little way down the main road.  When he arrived
at this place he found that the clock being so high up he could not see
the figures on the face distinctly, because it was still very dark.  He
stood staring for a few minutes vainly trying to see what time it was
when suddenly the light of a bull's-eye lantern was flashed into his
eyes.

'You're about very early,' said a voice, the owner of which Easton
could not see.  The light blinded him.

'What time is it?' said Easton.  'I've got to get to work at seven and
our clock stopped during the night.'

'Where are you working?'

'At "The Cave" in Elmore Road.  You know, near the old toll gate.'

'What are you doing there and who are you working for?' the policeman
demanded.

Easton explained.

'Well,' said the constable, 'it's very strange that you should be
wandering about at this hour.  It's only about three-quarters of an
hour's walk from here to Elmore Road.  You say you've got to get there
at seven, and it's only a quarter to four now.  Where do you live?
What's your name?'  Easton gave his name and address and began
repeating the story about the clock having stopped.

'What you say may be all right or it may not,' interrupted the
policeman.  'I'm not sure but that I ought to take you to the station.
All I know about you is that I find you loitering outside this shop.
What have you got in that basket?'

'Only my breakfast,' Easton said, opening the basket and displaying its
contents.

'I'm inclined to believe what you say,' said the policeman, after a
pause.  'But to make quite sure I'll go home with you.  It's on my
beat, and I don't want to run you in if you're what you say you are,
but I should advise you to buy a decent clock, or you'll be getting
yourself into trouble.'

When they arrived at the house Easton opened the door, and after making
some entries in his note-book the officer went away, much to the relief
of Easton, who went upstairs, set the hands of the clock right and
started it going again.  He then removed his overcoat and lay down on
the bed in his clothes, covering himself with the quilt. After a while
he fell asleep, and when he awoke the clock was still ticking.

The time was exactly seven o'clock.



Chapter 4

The Placard


Frank Owen was the son of a journeyman carpenter who had died of
consumption when the boy was only five years old.  After that his
mother earned a scanty living as a needle-woman.  When Frank was
thirteen he went to work for a master decorator who was a man of a type
that has now almost disappeared, being not merely an employer but a
craftsman of a high order.

He was an old man when Frank Owen went to work for him.  At one time he
had had a good business in the town, and used to boast that he had
always done good work, had found pleasure in doing it and had been well
paid for it.  But of late years the number of his customers had
dwindled considerably, for there had arisen a new generation which
cared nothing about craftsmanship or art, and everything for cheapness
and profit.  From this man and by laborious study and practice in his
spare time, aided by a certain measure of natural ability, the boy
acquired a knowledge of decorative painting and design, and graining
and signwriting.

Frank's mother died when he was twenty-four, and a year afterwards he
married the daughter of a fellow workman.  In those days trade was
fairly good and although there was not much demand for the more
artistic kinds of work, still the fact that he was capable of doing
them, if required, made it comparatively easy for him to obtain
employment.  Owen and his wife were very happy.  They had one child--a
boy--and for some years all went well.  But gradually this state of
things altered: broadly speaking, the change came slowly and
imperceptibly, although there were occasional sudden fluctuations.

Even in summer he could not always find work: and in winter it was
almost impossible to get a job of any sort.  At last, about twelve
months before the date that this story opens, he determined to leave
his wife and child at home and go to try his fortune in London.  When
he got employment he would send for them.

It was a vain hope.  He found London, if anything, worse than his
native town.  Wherever he went he was confronted with the legend: 'No
hands wanted'.  He walked the streets day after day; pawned or sold all
his clothes save those he stood in, and stayed in London for six
months, sometimes starving and only occasionally obtaining a few days
or weeks work.

At the end of that time he was forced to give in.  The privations he
had endured, the strain on his mind and the foul atmosphere of the city
combined to defeat him.  Symptoms of the disease that had killed his
father began to manifest themselves, and yielding to the repeated
entreaties of his wife he returned to his native town, the shadow of
his former self.

That was six months ago, and since then he had worked for Rushton & Co.
Occasionally when they had no work in hand, he was 'stood off' until
something came in.

Ever since his return from London, Owen had been gradually abandoning
himself to hopelessness.  Every day he felt that the disease he
suffered from was obtaining a stronger grip on him.  The doctor told
him to 'take plenty of nourishing food', and prescribed costly
medicines which Owen had not the money to buy.

Then there was his wife.  Naturally delicate, she needed many things
that he was unable to procure for her.  And the boy--what hope was
there for him?  Often as Owen moodily thought of their circumstances
and prospects he told himself that it would be far better if they could
all three die now, together.

He was tired of suffering himself, tired of impotently watching the
sufferings of his wife, and appalled at the thought of what was in
store for the child.

Of this nature were his reflections as he walked homewards on the
evening of the day when old Linden was dismissed.  There was no reason
to believe or hope that the existing state of things would be altered
for a long time to come.

Thousands of people like himself dragged out a wretched existence on
the very verge of starvation, and for the greater number of people life
was one long struggle against poverty.  Yet practically none of these
people knew or even troubled themselves to inquire why they were in
that condition; and for anyone else to try to explain to them was a
ridiculous waste of time, for they did not want to know.

The remedy was so simple, the evil so great and so glaringly evident
that the only possible explanation of its continued existence was that
the majority of his fellow workers were devoid of the power of
reasoning.  If these people were not mentally deficient they would of
their own accord have swept this silly system away long ago.  It would
not have been necessary for anyone to teach them that it was wrong.

Why, even those who were successful or wealthy could not be sure that
they would not eventually die of want.  In every workhouse might be
found people who had at one time occupied good positions; and their
downfall was not in every case their own fault.

No matter how prosperous a man might be, he could not be certain that
his children would never want for bread.  There were thousands living
in misery on starvation wages whose parents had been wealthy people.

As Owen strode rapidly along, his mind filled with these thoughts, he
was almost unconscious of the fact that he was wet through to the skin.
He was without an overcoat, it was pawned in London, and he had not yet
been able to redeem it.  His boots were leaky and sodden with mud and
rain.

He was nearly home now.  At the corner of the street in which he lived
there was a newsagent's shop and on a board outside the door was
displayed a placard:

                       TERRIBLE DOMESTIC TRAGEDY
                       DOUBLE MURDER AND SUICIDE

He went in to buy a copy of the paper.  He was a frequent customer
here, and as he entered the shopkeeper greeted him by name.

'Dreadful weather,' he remarked as he handed Owen the paper.  'It makes
things pretty bad in your line, I suppose?'

'Yes,' responded Owen, 'there's a lot of men idle, but fortunately I
happen to be working inside.'

'You're one of the lucky ones, then,' said the other.  'You know,
there'll be a job here for some of 'em as soon as the weather gets a
little better.  All the outside of this block is going to be done up.
That's a pretty big job, isn't it?'

'Yes,' returned Owen.  'Who's going to do it?'

'Makehaste and Sloggit.  You know, they've got a place over at Windley.'

'Yes, I know the firm,' said Owen, grimly.  He had worked for them once
or twice himself.

'The foreman was in here today,' the shopkeeper went on.  'He said
they're going to make a start Monday morning if it's fine.'

'Well, I hope it will be,' said Owen, 'because things are very quiet
just now.'

Wishing the other 'Good night', Owen again proceeded homewards.

Half-way down the street he paused irresolutely: he was thinking of the
news he had just heard and of Jack Linden.

As soon as it became generally known that this work was about to be
started there was sure to be a rush for it, and it would be a case of
first come, first served.  If he saw Jack tonight the old man might be
in time to secure a job.

Owen hesitated: he was wet through: it was a long way to Linden's
place, nearly twenty minutes' walk.  Still, he would like to let him
know, because unless he was one of the first to apply, Linden would not
stand such a good chance as a younger man.  Owen said to himself that
if he walked very fast there was not much risk of catching cold.
Standing about in wet clothes might be dangerous, but so long as one
kept moving it was all right.

He turned back and set off in the direction of Linden's house: although
he was but a few yards from his own home, he decided not to go in
because his wife would be sure to try to persuade him not to go out
again.

As he hurried along he presently noticed a small dark object on the
doorstep of an untenanted house.  He stopped to examine it more closely
and perceived that it was a small black kitten.  The tiny creature came
towards him and began walking about his feet, looking into his face and
crying piteously.  He stooped down and stroked it, shuddering as his
hands came in contact with its emaciated body.  Its fur was saturated
with rain and every joint of its backbone was distinctly perceptible to
the touch.  As he caressed it, the starving creature mewed pathetically.

Owen decided to take it home to the boy, and as he picked it up and put
it inside his coat the little outcast began to purr.

This incident served to turn his thoughts into another channel.   If,
as so many people pretended to believe, there was an infinitely loving
God, how was it that this helpless creature that He had made was
condemned to suffer?  It had never done any harm, and was in no sense
responsible for the fact that it existed.  Was God unaware of the
miseries of His creatures?  If so, then He was not all-knowing.  Was
God aware of their sufferings, but unable to help them?  Then He was
not all-powerful.  Had He the power but not the will to make His
creatures happy?  Then He was not good.  No; it was impossible to
believe in the existence of an individual, infinite God..  In fact, no
one did so believe; and least of all those who pretended for various
reasons to be the disciples and followers of Christ.  The anti-Christs
who went about singing hymns, making long prayers and crying Lord,
Lord, but never doing the things which He said, who were known by their
words to be unbelievers and infidels, unfaithful to the Master they
pretended to serve, their lives being passed in deliberate and
systematic disregard of His teachings and Commandments.  It was not
necessary to call in the evidence of science, or to refer to the
supposed inconsistencies, impossibilities, contradictions and
absurdities contained in the Bible, in order to prove there was no
truth in the Christian religion.  All that was necessary was to look at
the conduct of the individuals who were its votaries.



Chapter 5

The Clock-case


Jack Linden lived in a small cottage in Windley.  He had occupied this
house ever since his marriage, over thirty years ago.

His home and garden were his hobby: he was always doing something;
painting, whitewashing, papering and so forth.  The result was that
although the house itself was not of much account he had managed to get
it into very good order, and as a result it was very clean and
comfortable.

Another result of his industry was that--seeing the improved appearance
of the place--the landlord had on two occasions raised the rent.  When
Linden first took the house the rent was six shillings a week.  Five
years after, it was raised to seven shillings, and after the lapse of
another five years it had been increased to eight shillings.

During the thirty years of his tenancy he had paid altogether nearly
six hundred pounds in rent, more than double the amount of the present
value of the house.  Jack did not complain of this--in fact he was very
well satisfied.  He often said that Mr Sweater was a very good
landlord, because on several occasions when, being out of work, he had
been a few weeks behind with his rent the agent acting for the
benevolent Mr Sweater had allowed Linden to pay off the arrears by
instalments.  As old Jack was in the habit of remarking, many a
landlord would have sold up their furniture and turned them into the
street.

As the reader is already aware, Linden's household consisted of his
wife, his two grandchildren and his daughter-in-law, the widow and
children of his youngest son, a reservist, who died while serving in
the South African War.  This man had been a plasterer, and just before
the war he was working for Rushton & Co.

They had just finished their tea when Owen knocked at their front door.
The young woman went to see who was there.

'Is Mr Linden in?'

'Yes.  Who is it?'

'My name's Owen.'

Old Jack, however, had already recognized Owen's voice, and came to the
door, wondering what he wanted.

'As I was going home I heard that Makehaste and Sloggit are going to
start a large job on Monday, so I thought I'd run over and let you
know.'

'Are they?' said Linden.  'I'll go and see them in the morning.  But
I'm afraid I won't stand much chance, because a lot of their regular
hands are waiting for a job; but I'll go and see 'em all the same.'

'Well, you know, it's a big job.  All the outside of that block at the
corner of Kerk Street and Lord Street.  They're almost sure to want a
few extra hands.'

'Yes, there's something in that,' said Linden.  'Anyhow, I'm much
obliged to you for letting me know; but come in out of the rain.  You
must be wet through.'

'No; I won't stay,' responded Owen.  'I don't want to stand about any
longer than I can help in these wet clothes.'

'But it won't take you a minit to drink a cup of tea,' Linden insisted.
'I won't ask you to stop longer than that.'

Owen entered; the old man closed the door and led the way into the
kitchen.  At one side of the fire, Linden's wife, a frail-looking old
lady with white hair, was seated in a large armchair, knitting. Linden
sat down in a similar chair on the other side.  The two grandchildren,
a boy and girl about seven and eight years, respectively, were still
seated at the table.

Standing by the side of the dresser at one end of the room was a
treadle sewing machine, and on one end of the dresser was a a pile of
sewing: ladies' blouses in process of making.  This was another
instance of the goodness of Mr Sweater, from whom Linden's
daughter-in-law obtained the work.  It was not much, because she was
only able to do it in her spare time, but then, as she often remarked,
every little helped.

The floor was covered with linoleum: there were a number of framed
pictures on the walls, and on the high mantelshelf were a number of
brightly polished tins and copper utensils.  The room had that
indescribably homelike, cosy air that is found only in those houses in
which the inhabitants have dwelt for a very long time.

The younger woman was already pouring out a cup of tea.

Old Mrs Linden, who had never seen Owen before, although she had heard
of him, belonged to the Church of England and was intensely religious.
She looked curiously at the Atheist as he entered the room.  He had
taken off his hat and she was surprised to find that he was not
repulsive to look at, rather the contrary.  But then she remembered
that Satan often appears as an angel of light.  Appearances are
deceitful.  She wished that John had not asked him into the house and
hoped that no evil consequences would follow.  As she looked at him,
she was horrified to perceive a small black head with a pair of
glistening green eyes peeping out of the breast of his coat, and
immediately afterwards the kitten, catching sight of the cups and
saucers on the table, began to mew frantically and scrambled suddenly
out of its shelter, inflicting a severe scratch on Owen's restraining
hands as it jumped to the floor.

It clambered up the tablecloth and began rushing all over the table,
darting madly from one plate to another, seeking something to eat.

The children screamed with delight.  Their grandmother was filled with
a feeling of superstitious alarm.  Linden and the young woman stood
staring with astonishment at the unexpected visitor.

Before the kitten had time to do any damage, Owen caught hold of it
and, despite its struggles, lifted it off the table.

'I found it in the street as I was coming along,' he said.  'It seems
to be starving.'

'Poor little thing.  I'll give it something.' exclaimed the young woman.

She put some milk and bread into a saucer for it and the kitten ate
ravenously, almost upsetting the saucer in its eagerness, much to the
amusement of the two children, who stood by watching it admiringly.

Their mother now handed Owen a cup of tea.  Linden insisted on his
sitting down and then began to talk about Hunter.

'You know I HAD to spend some time on them doors to make 'em look
anything at all; but it wasn't the time I took, or even the smoking
what made 'im go on like that.  He knows very well the time it takes.
The real reason is that he thinks I was gettin' too much money.  Work
is done so rough nowadays that chaps like Sawkins is good enough for
most of it.  Hunter shoved me off just because I was getting the top
money, and you'll see I won't be the only one.'

'I'm afraid you're right,' returned Owen.  'Did you see Rushton when
you went for your money?'

'Yes,' replied Linden.  'I hurried up as fast as I could, but Hunter
was there first.  He passed me on his bike before I got half-way, so I
suppose he told his tale before I came.  Anyway, when I started to
speak to Mr Rushton he wouldn't listen.  Said he couldn't interfere
between Mr Hunter and the men.

'Ah!  They're a bad lot, them two,' said the old woman, shaking her
head sagely.  'But it'll all come 'ome to 'em, you'll see.  They'll
never prosper.  The Lord will punish them.'

Owen did not feel very confident of that.  Most of the people he knew
who had prospered were very similar in character to the two worthies in
question.  However, he did not want to argue with this poor old woman.

'When Tom was called up to go to the war,' said the young woman,
bitterly, 'Mr Rushton shook hands with him and promised to give him a
job when he came back.  But now that poor Tom's gone and they know that
me and the children's got no one to look to but Father, they do THIS.'

Although at the mention of her dead son's name old Mrs Linden was
evidently distressed, she was still mindful of the Atheist's presence,
and hastened to rebuke her daughter-in-law.

'You shouldn't say we've got no one to look to, Mary,' she said. 'We're
not as them who are without God and without hope in the world. The Lord
is our shepherd.  He careth for the widow and the fatherless.'

Owen was very doubtful about this also.  He had seen so many badly
cared-for children about the streets lately, and what he remembered of
his own sorrowful childhood was all evidence to the contrary.

An awkward silence succeeded.  Owen did not wish to continue this
conversation: he was afraid that he might say something that would hurt
the old woman.  Besides, he was anxious to get away; he began to feel
cold in his wet clothes.

As he put his empty cup on the table he said:

'Well, I must be going.  They'll be thinking I'm lost, at home.'

The kitten had finished all the bread and milk and was gravely washing
its face with one of its forepaws, to the great admiration of the two
children, who were sitting on the floor beside it.  It was an
artful-looking kitten, all black, with a very large head and a very
small body.  It reminded Owen of a tadpole.

'Do you like cats?' he asked, addressing the children.

'Yes,' said the boy.  'Give it to us, will you, mister?'

'Oh, do leave it 'ere, mister,' exclaimed the little girl.  'I'll look
after it.'

'So will I,' said the boy.

'But haven't you one of your own?' asked Owen.

'Yes; we've got a big one.'

'Well, if you have one already and I give you this, then you'd have two
cats, and I'd have none.  That wouldn't be fair, would it?'

'Well, you can 'ave a lend of our cat for a little while if you give us
this kitten,' said the boy, after a moment's thought.

'Why would you rather have the kitten?'

'Because it would play: our cat don't want to play, it's too old.'

'Perhaps you're too rough with it,' returned Owen.

'No, it ain't that; it's just because it's old.'

'You know cats is just the same as people,' explained the little girl,
wisely.  'When they're grown up I suppose they've got their troubles to
think about.'

Owen wondered how long it would be before her troubles commenced.  As
he gazed at these two little orphans he thought of his own child, and
of the rough and thorny way they would all three have to travel if they
were so unfortunate as to outlive their childhood.

'Can we 'ave it, mister?' repeated the boy.

Owen would have liked to grant the children's request, but he wanted
the kitten himself.  Therefore he was relieved when their grandmother
exclaimed:

'We don't want no more cats 'ere: we've got one already; that's quite
enough.'

She was not yet quite satisfied in her mind that the creature was not
an incarnation of the Devil, but whether it was or not she did not want
it, or anything else of Owen's, in this house.  She wished he would go,
and take his kitten or his familiar or whatever it was, with him. No
good could come of his being there.  Was it not written in the Word:
'If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maran-atha.'  She did not know exactly what Anathema Maran-atha meant,
but there could be no doubt that it was something very unpleasant.  It
was a terrible thing that this blasphemer who--as she had heard--did
not believe there was a Hell and said that the Bible was not the Word
of God, should be here in the house sitting on one of their chairs,
drinking from one of their cups, and talking to their children.

The children stood by wistfully when Owen put the kitten under his coat
and rose to go away.

As Linden prepared to accompany him to the front door, Owen, happening
to notice a timepiece standing on a small table in the recess at one
side of the fireplace, exclaimed:

'That's a very nice clock.'

'Yes, it's all right, ain't it?' said old Jack, with a touch of pride.
'Poor Tom made that: not the clock itself, but just the case.'

It was the case that had attracted Owen's attention.  It stood about
two feet high and was made of fretwork in the form of an Indian mosque,
with a pointed dome and pinnacles.  It was a very beautiful thing and
must have cost many hours of patient labour.

'Yes,' said the old woman, in a trembling, broken voice, and looking at
Owen with a pathetic expression.  'Months and months he worked at it,
and no one ever guessed who it were for.  And then, when my birthday
came round, the very first thing I saw when I woke up in the morning
were the clock standing on a chair by the bed with a card:

           'To dear mother, from her loving son, Tom.
               Wishing her many happy birthdays.'

'But he never had another birthday himself, because just five months
afterwards he were sent out to Africa, and he'd only been there five
weeks when he died.  Five years ago, come the fifteenth of next month.'

Owen, inwardly regretting that he had unintentionally broached so
painful a subject, tried to think of some suitable reply, but had to
content himself with murmuring some words of admiration of the work.

As he wished her good night, the old woman, looking at him, could not
help observing that he appeared very frail and ill: his face was very
thin and pale, and his eyes were unnaturally bright.

Possibly the Lord in His infinite loving kindness and mercy was
chastening this unhappy castaway in order that He might bring him to
Himself.  After all, he was not altogether bad: it was certainly very
thoughtful of him to come all this way to let John know about that job.
She observed that he had no overcoat, and the storm was still raging
fiercely outside, furious gusts of wind frequently striking the house
and shaking it to its very foundations.

The natural kindliness of her character asserted itself; her better
feelings were aroused, triumphing momentarily over the bigotry of her
religious opinions.

'Why, you ain't got no overcoat!' she exclaimed.  'You'll be soaked
goin' 'ome in this rain.'  Then, turning to her husband, she continued:
'There's that old one of yours; you might lend him that; it would be
better than nothing.'

But Owen would not hear of this: he thought, as he became very
conscious of the clammy feel of his saturated clothing, that he could
not get much wetter than he already was.  Linden accompanied him as far
as the front door, and Owen once more set out on his way homeward
through the storm that howled around like a wild beast hungry for its
prey.



Chapter 6

It is not My Crime


Owen and his family occupied the top floor of a house that had once
been a large private dwelling but which had been transformed into a
series of flats.  It was situated in Lord Street, almost in the centre
of the town.

At one time this had been a most aristocratic locality, but most of the
former residents had migrated to the newer suburb at the west of the
town.  Notwithstanding this fact, Lord Street was still a most
respectable neighbourhood, the inhabitants generally being of a very
superior type: shop-walkers, shop assistants, barber's clerks, boarding
house keepers, a coal merchant, and even two retired jerry-builders.

There were four other flats in the house in which Owen lived.  No. 1
(the basement) was occupied by an estate agent's clerk.  No. 2--on a
level with the street--was the habitat of the family of Mr Trafaim, a
cadaverous-looking gentleman who wore a top hat, boasted of his French
descent, and was a shop-walker at Sweater's Emporium.  No. 3 was
tenanted by an insurance agent, and in No. 4 dwelt a tallyman's
traveller.

Lord Street--like most other similar neighbourhoods--supplied a
striking answer to those futile theorists who prate of the equality of
mankind, for the inhabitants instinctively formed themselves into
groups, the more superior types drawing together, separating themselves
from the inferior, and rising naturally to the top, while the others
gathered themselves into distinct classes, grading downwards, or else
isolated themselves altogether; being refused admission to the circles
they desired to enter, and in their turn refusing to associate with
their inferiors.

The most exclusive set consisted of the families of the coal merchant,
the two retired jerry-builders and Mr Trafaim, whose superiority was
demonstrated by the fact that, to say nothing of his French extraction,
he wore--in addition to the top hat aforesaid--a frock coat and a pair
of lavender trousers every day.  The coal merchant and the jerry
builders also wore top hats, lavender trousers and frock coats, but
only on Sundays and other special occasions.  The estate agent's clerk
and the insurance agent, though excluded from the higher circle,
belonged to another select coterie from which they excluded in their
turn all persons of inferior rank, such as shop assistants or barbers.

The only individual who was received with equal cordiality by all
ranks, was the tallyman's traveller.  But whatever differences existed
amongst them regarding each other's social standing they were unanimous
on one point at least: they were indignant at Owen's presumption in
coming to live in such a refined locality.

This low fellow, this common workman, with his paint-bespattered
clothing, his broken boots, and his generally shabby appearance, was a
disgrace to the street; and as for his wife she was not much better,
because although whenever she came out she was always neatly dressed,
yet most of the neighbours knew perfectly well that she had been
wearing the same white straw hat all the time she had been there.  In
fact, the only tolerable one of the family was the boy, and they were
forced to admit that he was always very well dressed; so well indeed as
to occasion some surprise, until they found out that all the boy's
clothes were home-made.  Then their surprise was changed into a
somewhat grudging admiration of the skill displayed, mingled with
contempt for the poverty which made its exercise necessary.

The indignation of the neighbours was increased when it became known
that Owen and his wife were not Christians: then indeed everyone agreed
that the landlord ought to be ashamed of himself for letting the top
flat to such people.

But although the hearts of these disciples of the meek and lowly Jewish
carpenter were filled with uncharitableness, they were powerless to do
much harm.  The landlord regarded their opinion with indifference.  All
he cared about was the money: although he also was a sincere Christian,
he would not have hesitated to let the top flat to Satan himself,
provided he was certain of receiving the rent regularly.

The only one upon whom the Christians were able to inflict any
suffering was the child.  At first when he used to go out into the
street to play, the other children, acting on their parents'
instructions, refused to associate with him, or taunted him with his
parents' poverty.  Occasionally he came home heartbroken and in tears
because he had been excluded from some game.

At first, sometimes the mothers of some of the better-class children
used to come out with a comical assumption of superiority and dignity
and compel their children to leave off playing with Frankie and some
other poorly dressed children who used to play in that street.  These
females were usually overdressed and wore a lot of jewellery.  Most of
them fancied they were ladies, and if they had only had the sense to
keep their mouths shut, other people might possibly have shared the
same delusion.

But this was now a rare occurrence, because the parents of the other
children found it a matter of considerable difficulty to prevent their
youngsters from associating with those of inferior rank, for when left
to themselves the children disregarded all such distinctions.
Frequently in that street was to be seen the appalling spectacle of the
ten-year-old son of the refined and fashionable Trafaim dragging along
a cart constructed of a sugar box and an old pair of perambulator
wheels with no tyres, in which reposed the plebeian Frankie Owen, armed
with a whip, and the dowdy daughter of a barber's clerk: while the
nine-year-old heir of the coal merchant rushed up behind...

Owen's wife and little son were waiting for him in the living room.
This room was about twelve feet square and the ceiling--which was low
and irregularly shaped, showing in places the formation of the
roof--had been decorated by Owen with painted ornaments.

There were three or four chairs, and an oblong table, covered with a
clean white tablecloth, set ready for tea.  In the recess at the right
of fireplace--an ordinary open grate--were a number of shelves filled
with a miscellaneous collection of books, most of which had been bought
second-hand.

There were also a number of new books, mostly cheap editions in paper
covers.

Over the back of a chair at one side of the fire, was hanging an old
suit of Owen's, and some underclothing, which his wife had placed there
to air, knowing that he would be wet through by the time he arrived
home...

The woman was half-sitting, half lying, on a couch by the other side of
the fire.  She was very thin, and her pale face bore the traces of much
physical and mental suffering.  She was sewing, a task which her
reclining position rendered somewhat difficult.  Although she was
really only twenty-eight years of age, she appeared older.

The boy, who was sitting on the hearthrug playing with some toys, bore
a strong resemblance to his mother.  He also, appeared very fragile and
in his childish face was reproduced much of the delicate prettiness
which she had once possessed. His feminine appearance was increased by
the fact that his yellow hair hung in long curls on his shoulders.  The
pride with which his mother regarded this long hair was by no means
shared by Frankie himself, for he was always entreating her to cut it
off.

Presently the boy stood up and walking gravely over to the window,
looked down into the street, scanning the pavement for as far as he
could see: he had been doing this at intervals for the last hour.

'I wonder wherever he's got to,' he said, as he returned to the fire.

'I'm sure I don't know,' returned his mother.  'Perhaps he's had to
work overtime.'

'You know, I've been thinking lately,' observed Frankie, after a pause,
'that it's a great mistake for Dad to go out working at all.  I believe
that's the very reason why we're so poor.'

'Nearly everyone who works is more or less poor, dear, but if Dad
didn't go out to work we'd be even poorer than we are now.  We should
have nothing to eat.'

'But Dad says that the people who do nothing get lots of everything.'

'Yes, and it's quite true that most of the people who never do any work
get lots of everything, but where do they get it from?  And how do they
get it?'

'I'm sure I don't know,' replied Frankie, shaking his head in a puzzled
fashion.

'Supposing Dad didn't go to work, or that he had no work to go to, or
that he was ill and not able to do any work, then we'd have no money to
buy anything.  How should we get on then?'

'I'm sure I don't know,' repeated Frankie, looking round the room in a
thoughtful manner, 'The chairs that's left aren't good enough to sell,
and we can't sell the beds, or your sofa, but you might pawn my velvet
suit.'

'But even if all the things were good enough to sell, the money we'd
get for them wouldn't last very long, and what should we do then?'

'Well, I suppose we'd have to go without, that's all, the same as we
did when Dad was in London.'

'But how do the people who never do any work manage to get lots of
money then?' added Frankie.

'Oh, there's lots of different ways.  For instance, you remember when
Dad was in London, and we had no food in the house, I had to sell the
easy chair.'

Frankie nodded.  'Yes,' he said, 'I remember you wrote a note and I
took it to the shop, and afterwards old Didlum came up here and bought
it, and then his cart came and a man took it away.'

'And do you remember how much he gave us for it?'

'Five shillings,' replied Frankie, promptly.  He was well acquainted
with the details of the transaction, having often heard his father and
mother discuss it.

'And when we saw it in his shop window a little while afterwards, what
price was marked on it?'

'Fifteen shillings.'

Well, that's one way of getting money without working.

Frankie played with his toys in silence for some minutes.  At last he
said:

'What other ways?'

'Some people who have some money already get more in this way: they
find some people who have no money and say to them, "Come and work for
us."  Then the people who have the money pay the workers just enough
wages to keep them alive whilst they are at work.  Then, when the
things that the working people have been making are finished, the
workers are sent away, and as they still have no money, they are soon
starving.  In the meantime the people who had the money take all the
things that the workers have made and sell them for a great deal more
money than they gave to the workers for making them.  That's another
way of getting lots of money without doing any useful work.'

'But is there no way to get rich without doing such things as that?'

'It's not possible for anyone to become rich without cheating other
people.'

'What about our schoolmaster then?  He doesn't do any work.'

'Don't you think it's useful and and also very hard work teaching all
those boys every day?  I don't think I should like to have to do it.'

'Yes, I suppose what he does is some use,' said Frankie thoughtfully.
'And it must be rather hard too, I should think.  I've noticed he looks
a bit worried sometimes, and sometimes he gets into a fine old wax when
the boys don't pay proper attention.'

The child again went over to the window, and pulling back the edge of
the blind looked down the deserted rain washed street.

'What about the vicar?' he remarked as he returned.

Although Frankie did not go to church or Sunday School, the day school
that he had attended was that attached to the parish church, and the
vicar was in the habit of looking in occasionally.

'Ah, he really is one of those who live without doing any necessary
work, and of all the people who do nothing, the vicar is one of the
very worst.'

Frankie looked up at his mother with some surprise, not because he
entertained any very high opinion of clergymen in general, for, having
been an attentive listener to many conversations between his parents,
he had of course assimilated their opinions as far as his infant
understanding permitted, but because at the school the scholars were
taught to regard the gentleman in question with the most profound
reverence and respect.

'Why, Mum?' he asked.

'For this reason, dearie.  You know that all the beautiful things which
the people who do nothing have are made by the people who work, don't
you?'

'Yes.'

'And you know that those who work have to eat the very worst food, and
wear the very worst clothes, and live in the very worst homes.'

'Yes,' said Frankie.

'And sometimes they have nothing to eat at all, and no clothes to wear
except rags, and even no homes to live in.'

'Yes,' repeated the child.

'Well, the vicar goes about telling the Idlers that it's quite right
for them to do nothing, and that God meant them to have nearly
everything that is made by those who work.  In fact, he tells them that
God made the poor for the use of the rich.  Then he goes to the workers
and tells them that God meant them to work very hard and to give all
the good things they make to those who do nothing, and that they should
be very thankful to God and to the idlers for being allowed to have
even the very worst food to eat and the rags, and broken boots to wear.
He also tells them that they mustn't grumble, or be discontented
because they're poor in this world, but that they must wait till
they're dead, and then God will reward them by letting them go to a
place called Heaven.'

Frankie laughed.

'And what about the Idlers?' he asked.

'The vicar says that if they believe everything he tells them and give
him some of the money they make out of the workers, then God will let
them into heaven also.'

'Well, that's not fair doos, is it, Mum?' said Frankie with some
indignation.

'It wouldn't be if it were true, but then you see it's not true, it
can't be true.'

'Why can't it, Mum?'

'Oh, for many reasons: to begin with, the vicar doesn't believe it
himself: he only pretends to.  For instance, he pretends to believe the
Bible, but if we read the Bible we find that Jesus said that God is our
father and that all the people in the world are His children, all
brothers and sisters.  But the vicar says that although Jesus said
"brothers and sisters" He really ought to have said "masters and
servants".  Again, Jesus said that His disciples should not think of
tomorrow, or save up a lot of money for themselves, but they should be
unselfish and help those who are in need.  Jesus said that His
disciples must not think about their own future needs at all, because
God will provide for them if they only do as He commands.  But the
vicar says that is all nonsense.

'Jesus also said that if anyone tried to do His disciples harm, they
must never resist, but forgive those who injured them and pray God to
forgive them also.  But the vicar says this is all nonsense too.  He
says that the world would never be able to go on if we did as Jesus
taught.  The vicar teaches that the way to deal with those that injure
us is to have them put into prison, or--if they belong to some other
country--to take guns and knives and murder them, and burn their
houses.  So you see the vicar doesn't really believe or do any of the
things that Jesus said: he only pretends.'

'But why does he pretend, and go about talking like that, Mum?  What
does he do it for?'

'Because he wishes to live without working himself, dear.'

'And don't the people know he's only pretending?'

'Some of them do.  Most of the idlers know that what the vicar says is
not true, but they pretend to believe it, and give him money for saying
it, because they want him to go on telling it to the workers so that
they will go on working and keep quiet and be afraid to think for
themselves.'

'And what about the workers?  Do they believe it?

'Most of them do, because when they were little children like you,
their mothers taught them to believe, without thinking, whatever the
vicar said, and that God made them for the use of the idlers.  When
they went to school, they were taught the same thing: and now that
they're grown up they really believe it, and they go to work and give
nearly everything they make to the idlers, and have next to nothing
left for themselves and their children.  That's the reason why the
workers' children have very bad clothes to wear and sometimes no food
to eat; and that's how it is that the idlers and their children have
more clothes than they need and more food than they can eat.  Some of
them have so much food that they are not able to eat it.  They just
waste it or throw it away.'

'When I'm grown up into a man,' said Frankie, with a flushed face, 'I'm
going to be one of the workers, and when we've made a lot of things, I
shall stand up and tell the others what to do.  If any of the idlers
come to take our things away, they'll get something they won't like.'

In a state of suppressed excitement and scarcely conscious of what he
was doing, the boy began gathering up the toys and throwing them
violently one by one into the box.

'I'll teach 'em to come taking our things away,' he exclaimed,
relapsing momentarily into his street style of speaking.

'First of all we'll all stand quietly on one side.  Then when the
idlers come in and start touching our things, we'll go up to 'em and
say, "'Ere, watcher doin' of?  Just you put it down, will yer?"  And if
they don't put it down at once, it'll be the worse for 'em, I can tell
you.'

All the toys being collected, Frankie picked up the box and placed it
noisily in its accustomed corner of the room.

'I should think the workers will be jolly glad when they see me coming
to tell them what to do, shouldn't you, Mum?'

'I don't know dear; you see so many people have tried to tell them, but
they won't listen, they don't want to hear.  They think it's quite
right that they should work very hard all their lives, and quite right
that most of the things they help to make should be taken away from
them by the people who do nothing.  The workers think that their
children are not as good as the children of the idlers, and they teach
their children that as soon as ever they are old enough they must be
satisfied to work very hard and to have only very bad good and clothes
and homes.'

'Then I should think the workers ought to be jolly ashamed of
themselves, Mum, don't you?'

'Well, in one sense they ought, but you must remember that that's what
they've always been taught themselves.  First, their mothers and
fathers told them so; then, their schoolteachers told them so; and
then, when they went to church, the vicar and the Sunday School teacher
told them the same thing.  So you can't be surprised that they now
really believe that God made them and their children to make things for
the use of the people who do nothing.'

'But you'd think their own sense would tell them!  How can it be right
for the people who do nothing to have the very best and  most of
everything thats made, and the very ones who make everything to have
hardly any.  Why even I know better than that, and I'm only six and a
half years old.'

'But then you're different, dearie, you've been taught to think about
it, and Dad and I have explained it to you, often.'

'Yes, I know,' replied Frankie confidently.  'But even if you'd never
taught me, I'm sure I should have tumbled to it all right by myself;
I'm not such a juggins as you think I am.'

'So you might, but you wouldn't if you'd been brought up in the same
way as most of the workers.  They've been taught that it's very wicked
to use their own judgement, or to think.  And their children are being
taught so now.  Do you remember what you told me the other day, when
you came home from school, about the Scripture lesson?'

'About St Thomas?'

'Yes.  What did the teacher say St Thomas was?'

'She said he was a bad example; and she said I was worse than him
because I asked too many foolish questions.  She always gets in a wax
if I talk too much.'

'Well, why did she call St Thomas a bad example?'

'Because he wouldn't believe what he was told.'

'Exactly: well, when you told Dad about it what did he say?'

'Dad told me that really St Thomas was the only sensible man in the
whole crowd of Apostles.  That is,' added Frankie, correcting himself,
'if there ever was such a man at all.'

'But did Dad say that there never was such a man?'

'No; he said HE didn't believe there ever was, but he told me to just
listen to what the teacher said about such things, and then to think
about it in my own mind, and wait till I'm grown up and then I can use
my own judgement.'

'Well, now, that's what YOU were told, but all the other children's
mothers and fathers tell them to believe, without thinking, whatever
the teacher says.  So it will be no wonder if those children are not
able to think for themselves when they're grown up, will it?'

'Don't you think it will be any use, then, for me to tell them what to
do to the Idlers?' asked Frankie, dejectedly.

'Hark!' said his mother, holding up her finger.

'Dad!' cried Frankie, rushing to the door and flinging it open.  He ran
along the passage and opened the staircase door before Owen reached the
top of the last flight of stairs.

'Why ever do you come up at such a rate,' reproachfully exclaimed
Owen's wife as he came into the room exhausted from the climb upstairs
and sank panting into the nearest chair.

'I al-ways-for-get,' he replied, when he had in some degree recovered.
As he lay back in the chair, his face haggard and of a ghastly
whiteness, and with the water dripping from his saturated clothing,
Owen presented a terrible appearance.

Frankie noticed with childish terror the extreme alarm with which his
mother looked at his father.

'You're always doing it,' he said with a whimper.  'How many more times
will Mother have to tell you about it before you take any notice?'

'It's all right, old chap,' said Owen, drawing the child nearer to him
and kissing the curly head.  'Listen, and see if you can guess what
I've got for you under my coat.'

In the silence the purring of the kitten was distinctly audible.

'A kitten!' cried the boy, taking it out of its hiding-place.  'All
black, and I believe it's half a Persian.  Just the very thing I
wanted.'

While Frankie amused himself playing with the kitten, which had been
provided with another saucer of bread and milk, Owen went into the
bedroom to put on the dry clothes, and then, those that he had taken
off having been placed with his boots near the fire to dry, he
explained as they were taking tea the reason of his late homecoming.

'I'm afraid he won't find it very easy to get another job,' he
remarked, referring to Linden.  'Even in the summer nobody will be
inclined to take him on.  He's too old.'

'It's a dreadful prospect for the two children,' answered his wife.

'Yes,' replied Owen bitterly.  'It's the children who will suffer most.
As for Linden and his wife, although of course one can't help feeling
sorry for them, at the same time there's no getting away from the fact
that they deserve to suffer.  All their lives they've been working like
brutes and living in poverty.  Although they have done more than their
fair share of the work, they have never enjoyed anything like a fair
share of the things they have helped to produce. And yet, all their
lives they have supported and defended the system that robbed them, and
have resisted and ridiculed every proposal to alter it.  It's wrong to
feel sorry for such people; they deserve to suffer.'

After tea, as he watched his wife clearing away the tea things and
rearranging the drying clothing by the fire, Owen for the first time
noticed that she looked unusually ill.

'You don't look well tonight, Nora,' he said, crossing over to her and
putting his arm around her.

'I don't feel well,' she replied, resting her head wearily against his
shoulder.  'I've been very bad all day and I had to lie down nearly all
the afternoon.  I don't know how I should have managed to get the tea
ready if it had not been for Frankie.'

'I set the table for you, didn't I, Mum?' said Frankie with pride; 'and
tidied up the room as well.'

'Yes, darling, you helped me a lot,' she answered, and Frankie went
over to her and kissed her hand.

'Well, you'd better go to bed at once,' said Owen.  'I can put Frankie
to bed presently and do whatever else is necessary.'

'But there are so many things to attend to.  I want to see that your
clothes are properly dry and to put something ready for you to take in
the morning before you go out, and then there's your breakfast to pack
up--'

'I can manage all that.'

'I didn't want to give way to it like this,' the woman said, 'because I
know you must be tired out yourself, but I really do feel quite done up
now.'

'Oh, I'm all right,' replied Owen, who was really so fatigued that he
was scarcely able to stand.  'I'll go and draw the blinds down and
light the other lamp; so say good night to Frankie and come at once.'

'I won't say good night properly, now, Mum,' remarked the boy, 'because
Dad can carry me into your room before he puts me into bed.'

A little later, as Owen was undressing Frankie, the latter remarked as
he looked affectionately at the kitten, which was sitting on the
hearthrug watching the child's every movement under the impression that
it was part of some game:

'What name do you think we ought to call it, Dad?'

'You may give him any name you like,' replied Owen, absently.

'I know a dog that lives down the road,' said the boy, 'his name is
Major.  How would that do?  Or we might call him Sergeant.'

The kitten, observing that he was the subject of their conversation,
purred loudly and winked as if to intimate that he did not care what
rank was conferred upon him so long as the commisariat department was
properly attended to.

'I don't know, though,' continued Frankie, thoughtfully.  'They're all
right names for dogs, but I think they're too big for a kitten, don't
you, Dad?'

'Yes, p'raps they are,' said Owen.

'Most cats are called Tom or Kitty, but I don't want a COMMON name for
him.'

'Well, can't you call him after someone you know?'

'I know; I'll call him after a little girl that comes to our school; a
fine name, Maud!  That'll be a good one, won't it Dad?'

'Yes,' said Owen.

'I say, Dad,' said Frankie, suddenly realizing the awful fact that he
was being put to bed.  'You're forgetting all about my story, and you
promised that you'd have a game of trains with me tonight.'

'I hadn't forgotten, but I was hoping that you had, because I'm very
tired and it's very late, long past your usual bedtime, you know.  You
can take the kitten to bed with you tonight and I'll tell you two
stories tomorrow, because it's Saturday.'

'All right, then,' said the boy, contentedly; 'and I'll get the railway
station built and I'll have the lines chalked on the floor, and the
signals put up before you come home, so that there'll be no time
wasted.  And I'll put one chair at one end of the room and another
chair at the other end, and tie some string across for telegraph wires.
That'll be a very good idea, won't it, Dad?' and Owen agreed.

'But of course I'll come to meet you just the same as other Saturdays,
because I'm going to buy a ha'porth of milk for the kitten out of my
penny.'

After the child was in bed, Owen sat alone by the table in the draughty
sitting-room, thinking.  Although there was a bright fire, the room was
very cold, being so close to the roof.  The wind roared loudly round
the gables, shaking the house in a way that threatened every moment to
hurl it to the ground.  The lamp on the table had a green glass
reservoir which was half full of oil.  Owen watched this with
unconscious fascination.  Every time a gust of wind struck the house
the oil in the lamp was agitated and rippled against the glass like the
waves of a miniature sea.  Staring abstractedly at the lamp, he thought
of the future.

A few years ago the future had seemed a region of wonderful and
mysterious possibilities of good, but tonight the thought brought no
such illusions, for he knew that the story of the future was to be much
the same as the story of the past.

The story of the past would continue to repeat itself for a few years
longer.  He would continue to work and they would all three continue to
do without most of the necessaries of life.  When there was no work
they would starve.

For himself he did not care much because he knew that at the best--or
worst--it would only be a very few years.  Even if he were to have
proper food and clothing and be able to take reasonable care of
himself, he could not live much longer; but when that time came, what
was to become of THEM?

There would be some hope for the boy if he were more robust and if his
character were less gentle and more selfish.  Under the present system
it was impossible for anyone to succeed in life without injuring other
people and treating them and making use of them as one would not like
to be treated and made use of oneself.

In order to succeed in the world it was necessary to be brutal, selfish
and unfeeling: to push others aside and to take advantage of their
misfortunes: to undersell and crush out one's competitors by fair means
or foul: to consider one's own interests first in every case,
absolutely regardless of the wellbeing of others.

That was the ideal character.  Owen knew that Frankie's character did
not come up to this lofty ideal.  Then there was Nora, how would she
fare?

Owen stood up and began walking about the room, oppressed with a kind
of terror.  Presently he returned to the fire and began rearranging the
clothes that were drying.  He found that the boots, having been placed
too near the fire, had dried too quickly and consequently the sole of
one of them had begun to split away from the upper: he remedied this as
well as he was able and then turned the wetter parts of the clothing to
the fire.  Whilst doing this he noticed the newspaper, which he had
forgotten, in the coat pocket.  He drew it out with an exclamation of
pleasure.  Here was something to distract his thoughts: if not
instructive or comforting, it would at any rate be interesting and even
amusing to read the reports of the self-satisfied, futile talk of the
profound statesmen who with comical gravity presided over the working
of the Great System which their combined wisdom pronounced to be the
best that could possibly be devised.  But tonight Owen was not to read
of those things, for as soon as he opened the paper his attention was
riveted by the staring headline of one of the principal columns:

                     TERRIBLE DOMESTIC TRAGEDY
                   Wife And Two Children Killed
                      Suicide of the Murderer

It was one of the ordinary poverty crimes.  The man had been without
employment for many weeks and they had been living by pawning or
selling their furniture and other possessions.  But even this resource
must have failed at last, and when one day the neighbours noticed that
the blinds remained down and that there was a strange silence about the
house, no one coming out or going in, suspicions that something was
wrong were quickly aroused.  When the police entered the house, they
found, in one of the upper rooms, the dead bodies of the woman and the
two children, with their throats severed, laid out side by side upon
the bed, which was saturated with their blood.

There was no bedstead and no furniture in the room except the straw
mattress and the ragged clothes and blankets which formed the bed upon
the floor.

The man's body was found in the kitchen, lying with outstretched arms
face downwards on the floor, surrounded by the blood that had poured
from the wound in his throat which had evidently been inflicted by the
razor that was grasped in his right hand.

No particle of food was found in the house, and on a nail in the wall
in the kitchen was hung a piece of blood-smeared paper on which was
written in pencil:

'This is not my crime, but society's.'

The report went on to explain that the deed must have been perpetrated
during a fit of temporary insanity brought on by the sufferings the man
had endured.

'Insanity!' muttered Owen, as he read this glib theory.  'Insanity! It
seems to me that he would have been insane if he had NOT killed them.'

Surely it was wiser and better and kinder to send them all to sleep,
than to let them continue to suffer.

At the same time he thought it very strange that the man should have
chosen to do it that way, when there were so many other cleaner, easier
and more painless ways of accomplishing the same object.  He wondered
why it was that most of these killings were done in more or less the
same crude, cruel messy way.  No; HE would set about it in a different
fashion.  He would get some charcoal, then he would paste strips of
paper over the joinings of the door and windows of the room and close
the register of the grate.  Then he would kindle the charcoal on a tray
or something in the middle of the room, and then they would all three
just lie down together and sleep; and that would be the end of
everything.  There would be no pain, no blood, and no mess.

Or one could take poison.  Of course, there was a certain amount of
difficulty in procuring it, but it would not be impossible to find some
pretext for buying some laudanum: one could buy several small
quantities at different shops until one had sufficient.  Then he
remembered that he had read somewhere that vermillion, one of the
colours he frequently had to use in his work, was one of the most
deadly poisons: and there was some other stuff that photographers used,
which was very easy to procure.  Of course, one would have to be very
careful about poisons, so as not to select one that would cause a lot
of pain.  It would be necessary to find out exactly how the stuff acted
before using it.  It would not be very difficult to do so.  Then he
remembered that among his books was one that probably contained some
information about this subject.  He went over to the book-shelf and
presently found the volume; it was called The Cyclopedia of Practical
Medicine, rather an old book, a little out of date, perhaps, but still
it might contain the information he wanted.  Opening it, he turned to
the table of contents.  Many different subjects were mentioned there
and presently he found the one he sought:

Poisons: chemically, physiologically and pathologically considered.
    Corrosive Poisons.
    Narcotic Poisons.
    Slow Poisons.
    Consecutive Poisons.
    Accumulative Poisons.

He turned to the chapter indicated and, reading it, he was astonished
to find what a number of poisons there were within easy reach of
whoever wished to make use of them: poisons that could be relied upon
to do their work certainly, quickly and without pain.  Why, it was not
even necessary to buy them: one could gather them from the hedges by
the road side and in the fields.

The more he thought of it the stranger it seemed that such a clumsy
method as a razor should be so popular.  Why almost any other way would
be better and easier than that.  Strangulation or even hanging, though
the latter method could scarcely be adopted in that house, because
there were no beams or rafters or anything from which it would be
possible to suspend a cord.  Still, he could drive some large nails or
hooks into one of the walls.  For that matter, there were already some
clothes-hooks on some of the doors.  He began to think that this would
be an even more excellent way than poison or charcoal; he could easily
pretend to Frankie that he was going to show him some new kind of play.

He could arrange the cord on the hook on one of the doors and then
under pretence of play, it would be done.  The boy would offer no
resistance, and in a few minutes it would all be over.

He threw down the book and pressed his hands over his ears: he fancied
he could hear the boy's hands and feet beating against the panels of
the door as he struggled in his death agony.

Then, as his arms fell nervelessly by his side again, he thought that
he heard Frankie's voice calling.

'Dad!  Dad!'

Owen hastily opened the door.

'Are you calling, Frankie?'

'Yes.  I've been calling you quite a long time.'

'What do you want?'

'I want you to come here.  I want to tell you something.'

'Well, what is it dear?  I thought you were asleep a long time ago,'
said Owen as he came into the room.

'That's just what I want to speak to you about: the kitten's gone to
sleep all right, but I can't go.  I've tried all different ways,
counting and all, but it's no use, so I thought I'd ask you if you'd
mind coming and staying with me, and letting me hold you hand for a
little while and them p'raps I could go.'

The boy twined his arms round Owen's neck and hugged him very tightly.

'Oh, Dad, I love you so much!' he said.  'I love you so much, I could
squeeze you to death.'

'I'm afraid you will, if you squeeze me so tightly as that.'

The boy laughed softly as he relaxed his hold.  'That WOULD be a funny
way of showing you how much I love you, wouldn't it, Dad?  Squeezing
you to death!'

'Yes, I suppose it would,' replied Owen huskily, as he tucked the
bedclothes round the child's shoulders.  'But don't talk any more,
dear; just hold my hand and try to sleep.'

'All right,' said Frankie.

Lying there very quietly, holding his father's hand and occasionally
kissing it, the child presently fell asleep.  Then Owen got up very
gently and, having taken the kitten out of the bed again and arranged
the bedclothes, he softly kissed the boy's forehead and returned to the
other room.

Looking about for a suitable place for the kitten to sleep in, he
noticed Frankie's toy box, and having emptied the toys on to the floor
in a corner of the room, he made a bed in the box with some rags and
placed it on its side on the hearthrug, facing the fire, and with some
difficulty persuaded the kitten to lie in it.  Then, having placed the
chairs on which his clothes were drying at a safe distance from the
fire, he went into the bedroom.  Nora was still awake.

'Are you feeling any better, dear?' he said.

'Yes, I'm ever so much better since I've been in bed, but I can't help
worrying about your clothes.  I'm afraid they'll never be dry enough
for you to put on the first thing in the morning.  Couldn't you stay at
home till after breakfast, just for once?'

'No; I mustn't do that.  If I did Hunter would probably tell me to stay
away altogether.  I believe he would be glad of an excuse to get rid of
another full-price man just now.'

'But if it's raining like this in the morning, you'll be wet through
before you get there.'

'It's no good worrying about that dear: besides, I can wear this old
coat that I have on now, over the other.'

'And if you wrap your old shoes in some paper, and take them with you,
you can take off your wet boots as soon as you get to the place.'

'Yes, all right,' responded Owen.  'Besides,' he added, reassuringly,
'even if I do get a little wet, we always have a fire there, you know.'

'Well, I hope the weather will be a little better than this in the
morning,' said Nora.  'Isn't it a dreadful night!  I keep feeling
afraid that the house is going to be blown down.'

Long after Nora was asleep, Owen lay listening to the howling of the
wind and the noise of the rain as it poured heavily on the roof...



Chapter 7

The Exterminating Machines


'Come on, Saturday!' shouted Philpot, just after seven o'clock one
Monday morning as they were getting ready to commence work.

It was still dark outside, but the scullery was dimly illuminated by
the flickering light of two candles which Crass had lighted and stuck
on the shelf over the fireplace in order to enable him to see to serve
out the different lots of paints and brushes to the men.

'Yes, it do seem a 'ell of a long week, don't it?' remarked Harlow as
he hung his overcoat on a nail and proceeded to put on his apron and
blouse.  'I've 'ad bloody near enough of it already.'

'Wish to Christ it was breakfast-time,' growled the more easily
satisfied Easton.

Extraordinary as it may appear, none of them took any pride in their
work: they did not 'love' it.  They had no conception of that lofty
ideal of 'work for work's sake', which is so popular with the people
who do nothing.  On the contrary, when the workers arrived in the
morning they wished it was breakfast-time.  When they resumed work
after breakfast they wished it was dinner-time.  After dinner they
wished it was one o'clock on Saturday.

So they went on, day after day, year after year, wishing their time was
over and, without realizing it, really wishing that they were dead.

How extraordinary this must appear to those idealists who believe in
'work for work's sake', but who themselves do nothing but devour or use
and enjoy or waste the things that are produced by the labour of those
others who are not themselves permitted to enjoy a fair share of the
good things they help to create?

Crass poured several lots of colour into several pots.

'Harlow,' he said, 'you and Sawkins, when he comes, can go up and do
the top bedrooms out with this colour.  You'll find a couple of candles
up there.  It's only goin' to 'ave one coat, so see that you make it
cover all right, and just look after Sawkins a bit so as 'e doesn't
make a bloody mess of it.  You do the doors and windows, and let 'im do
the cupboards and skirtings.'

'That's a bit of all right, I must say,' Harlow said, addressing the
company generally.  'We've got to teach a b--r like 'im so as 'e can do
us out of a job presently by working under price.'

'Well, I can't 'elp it,' growled Crass.  'You know 'ow it is: 'Unter
sends 'im 'ere to do paintin', and I've got to put 'im on it.  There
ain't nothing else for 'im to do.'

Further discussion on this subject was prevented by Sawkins' arrival,
nearly a quarter of an hour late.

'Oh, you 'ave come, then,' sneered Crass.  'Thought p'raps you'd gorn
for a 'oliday.'

Sawkins muttered something about oversleeping himself, and having
hastily put on his apron, he went upstairs with Harlow.

'Now, let's see,' Crass said, addressing Philpot.  'You and Newman 'ad
better go and make a start on the second floor: this is the colour, and
'ere's a couple of candles.  You'd better not both go in one room or
'Unter will growl about it.  You take one of the front and let Newman
take one of the back rooms.  Take a bit of stoppin' with you: they're
goin' to 'ave two coats, but you'd better putty up the 'oles as well as
you can, this time.'

'Only two coats!' said Philpot.  'Them rooms will never look nothing
with two coats--a light colour like this.'

'It's only goin' to get two, anyway,' returned Crass, testily. ''Unter
said so, so you'll 'ave to do the best you can with 'em, and get 'em
smeared over middlin' sudden, too.'

Crass did not think it necessary to mention that according to the copy
of the specification of the work which he had in his pocket the rooms
in question were supposed to have four coats.

Crass now turned to Owen.

'There's that drorin'-room,' he said.  'I don't know what's goin' to be
done with that yet.  I don't think they've decided about it. Whatever's
to be done to it will be an extra, because all that's said about it in
the contract is to face it up with putty and give it one coat of white.
So you and Easton 'ad better get on with it.'

Slyme was busy softening some putty by rubbing and squeezing it between
his hands.

'I suppose I'd better finish the room I started on on Saturday?' he
asked.

'All right,' replied Crass.  'Have you got enough colour?'

'Yes,' said Slyme.

As he passed through the kitchen on the way to his work, Slyme accosted
Bert, the boy, who was engaged in lighting, with some pieces of wood, a
fire to boil the water to make the tea for breakfast at eight o'clock.

'There's a bloater I want's cooked,' he said.

'All right,' replied Bert.  'Put it over there on the dresser along of
Philpot's and mine.'

Slyme took the bloater from his food basket, but as he was about to put
it in the place indicated, he observed that his was rather a larger one
than either of the other two.  This was an important matter.  After
they were cooked it would not be easy to say which was which: he might
possibly be given one of the smaller ones instead of his own.  He took
out his pocket knife and cut off the tail of the large bloater.

''Ere it is, then,' he said to Bert.  'I've cut the tail of mine so as
you'll know which it is.'

It was now about twenty minutes past seven and all the other men having
been started at work, Crass washed his hands under the tap. Then he
went into the kitchen and having rigged up a seat by taking two of the
drawers out of the dresser and placing them on the floor about six feet
apart and laying a plank across, he sat down in front of the fire,
which was now burning brightly under the pail, and, lighting his pipe,
began to smoke.  The boy went into the scullery and began washing up
the cups and jars for the men to drink out of.

Bert was a lean, undersized boy about fifteen years of age and about
four feet nine inches in height.  He had light brown hair and hazel
grey eyes, and his clothes were of many colours, being thickly
encrusted with paint, the result of the unskillful manner in which he
did his work, for he had only been at the trade about a year.  Some of
the men had nicknamed him 'the walking paint-shop', a title which Bert
accepted good-humouredly.

This boy was an orphan.  His father had been a railway porter who had
worked very laboriously for twelve or fourteen hours every day for many
years, with the usual result, namely, that he and his family lived in a
condition of perpetual poverty.  Bert, who was their only child and not
very robust, had early shown a talent for drawing, so when his father
died a little over a year ago, his mother readily assented when the boy
said that he wished to become a decorator.  It was a nice light trade,
and she thought that a really good painter, such as she was sure he
would become, was at least always able to earn a good living.
Resolving to give the boy the best possible chance, she decided if
possible to place him at Rushton's, that being one of the leading firms
in the town.  At first Mr Rushton demanded ten pounds as a premium, the
boy to be bound for five years, no wages the first year, two shillings
a week the second, and a rise of one shilling every year for the
remainder of the term.  Afterwards, as a special favour--a matter of
charity, in fact, as she was a very poor woman--he agreed to accept
five pounds.

This sum represented the thrifty savings of years, but the poor woman
parted with it willingly in order that the boy should become a skilled
workman.  So Bert was apprenticed--bound for five years--to Rushton &
Co.

For the first few months his life had been spent in the paint-shop at
the yard, a place that was something between a cellar and a stable.
There, surrounded by the poisonous pigments and materials of the trade,
the youthful artisan worked, generally alone, cleaning the dirty
paint-pots brought in by the workmen from finished 'jobs' outside, and
occasionally mixing paint according to the instructions of Mr Hunter,
or one of the sub-foremen.

Sometimes he was sent out to carry materials to the places where the
men were working--heavy loads of paint or white lead--sometimes pails
of whitewash that his slender arms had been too feeble to carry more
than a few yards at a time.

Often his fragile, childish figure was seen staggering manfully along,
bending beneath the weight of a pair of steps or a heavy plank.

He could manage a good many parcels at once: some in each hand and some
tied together with string and slung over his shoulders. Occasionally,
however, there were more than he could carry; then they were put into a
handcart which he pushed or dragged after him to the distant jobs.

That first winter the boy's days were chiefly spent in the damp,
evil-smelling, stone-flagged paint-shop, without even a fire to warm
the clammy atmosphere.

But in all this he had seen no hardship.  With the unconsciousness of
boyhood, he worked hard and cheerfully.  As time went on, the goal of
his childish ambition was reached--he was sent out to work with the
men!  And he carried the same spirit with him, always doing his best to
oblige those with whom he was working.

He tried hard to learn, and to be a good boy, and he succeeded, fairly
well.

He soon became a favourite with Owen, for whom he conceived a great
respect and affection, for he observed that whenever there was any
special work of any kind to be done it was Owen who did it.  On such
occasions, Bert, in his artful, boyish way, would scheme to be sent to
assist Owen, and the latter whenever possible used to ask that the boy
might be allowed to work with him.

Bert's regard for Owen was equalled in intensity by his dislike of
Crass, who was in the habit of jeering at the boy's aspirations.
'There'll be plenty of time for you to think about doin' fancy work
after you've learnt to do plain painting,' he would say.

This morning, when he had finished washing up the cups and mugs, Bert
returned with them to the kitchen.

'Now let's see,' said Crass, thoughtfully, 'You've put the tea in the
pail, I s'pose.'

'Yes.'

'And now you want a job, don't you?'

'Yes,' replied the boy.

'Well, get a bucket of water and that old brush and a swab, and go and
wash off the old whitewash and colouring orf the pantry ceiling and
walls.'

'All right,' said Bert.  When he got as far as the door leading into
the scullery he looked round and said:

'I've got to git them three bloaters cooked by breakfast time.'

'Never mind about that,' said Crass.  'I'll do them.'

Bert got the pail and the brush, drew some water from the tap, got a
pair of steps and a short plank, one end of which he rested on the
bottom shelf of the pantry and the other on the steps, and proceeded to
carry out Crass's instructions.

It was very cold and damp and miserable in the pantry, and the candle
only made it seem more so.  Bert shivered: he would like to have put
his jacket on, but that was out of the question at a job like this. He
lifted the bucket of water on to one of the shelves and, climbing up on
to the plank, took the brush from the water and soaked about a square
yard of the ceiling; then he began to scrub it with the brush.

He was not very skilful yet, and as he scrubbed the water ran down over
the stock of the brush, over his hand and down his uplifted arm,
wetting the turned-up sleeves of his shirt.  When he had scrubbed it
sufficiently he rinsed it off as well as he could with the brush, and
then, to finish with, he thrust his hand into the pail of water and,
taking out the swab, wrung the water out of it and wiped the part of
the ceiling that he had washed.  Then he dropped it back into the pail,
and shook his numbed fingers to restore the circulation.  Then he
peeped into the kitchen, where Crass was still seated by the fire,
smoking and toasting one of the bloaters at the end of a pointed stick.
Bert wished he would go upstairs, or anywhere, so that he himself might
go and have a warm at the fire.

''E might just as well 'ave let me do them bloaters,' he muttered to
himself, regarding Crass malignantly through the crack of the door.
'This is a fine job to give to anybody--a cold mornin' like this.'

He shifted the pail of water a little further along the shelf and went
on with the work.

A little later, Crass, still sitting by the fire, heard footsteps
approaching along the passage.  He started up guiltily and, thrusting
the hand holding his pipe into his apron pocket, retreated hastily into
the scullery.  He thought it might be Hunter, who was in the habit of
turning up at all sorts of unlikely times, but it was only Easton.

'I've got a bit of bacon I want the young 'un to toast for me,' he said
as Crass came back.

'You can do it yourself if you like,' replied Crass affably, looking at
his watch.  'It's about ten to eight.'

Easton had been working for Rushton & Co. for a fortnight, and had been
wise enough to stand Crass a drink on several occasions: he was
consequently in that gentleman's good books for the time being.

'How are you getting on in there?' Crass asked, alluding to the work
Easton and Owen were doing in the drawing-room.  'You ain't fell out
with your mate yet, I s'pose?'

'No; 'e ain't got much to say this morning; 'is cough's pretty bad.  I
can generally manage to get on orl right with anybody, you know,'
Easton added.

'Well, so can I as a rule, but I get a bit sick listening to that
bloody fool.  Accordin' to 'im, everything's wrong.  One day it's
religion, another it's politics, and the next it's something else.'

'Yes, it is a bit thick; too much of it,' agreed Easton, 'but I don't
take no notice of the bloody fool: that's the best way.'

'Of course, we know that things is a bit bad just now,' Crass went on,
'but if the likes of 'im could 'ave their own way they'd make 'em a
bloody sight worse.'

'That's just what I say,' replied Easton.

'I've got a pill ready for 'im, though, next time 'e start yappin','
Crass continued as he drew a small piece of printed paper from his
waistcoat pocket.  'Just read that; it's out of the Obscurer.'

Easton took the newspaper cutting and read it: 'Very good,' he remarked
as he handed it back.

'Yes, I think that'll about shut 'im up.  Did yer notice the other day
when we was talking about poverty and men bein' out of work, 'ow 'e
dodged out of answerin' wot I said about machinery bein' the cause of
it?   'e never answered me!  Started talkin' about something else.'

'Yes, I remember 'e never answered it,' said Easton, who had really no
recollection of the incident at all.

'I mean to tackle 'im about it at breakfast-time.  I don't see why 'e
should be allowed to get out of it like that.  There was a bloke down
at the "Cricketers" the other night talkin' about the same thing--a
chap as takes a interest in politics and the like, and 'e said the very
same as me.  Why, the number of men what's been throwed out of work by
all this 'ere new-fangled machinery is something chronic!'

'Of course,' agreed Easton, 'everyone knows it.'

'You ought to give us a look in at the "Cricketers" some night. There's
a lot of decent chaps comes there.'

'Yes, I think I will.'

'What 'ouse do you usually use?' asked Crass after a pause.

Easton laughed.  'Well, to tell you the truth I've not used anywhere's
lately.  Been 'avin too many 'ollerdays.'

'That do make a bit of difference, don't it?' said Crass.  'But you'll
be all right 'ere, till this job's done.  Just watch yerself a bit, and
don't get comin' late in the mornin's.  Old Nimrod's dead nuts on that.'

'I'll see to that all right,' replied Easton.  'I don't believe in
losing time when there IS work to do.  It's bad enough when you can't
get it.'

'You know,' Crass went on, confidentially.  'Between me an' you an' the
gatepost, as the sayin' is, I don't think Mr bloody Owen will be 'ere
much longer.  Nimrod 'ates the sight of 'im.'

Easton had it in his mind to say that Nimrod seemed to hate the sight
of all of them: but he made no remark, and Crass continued:

''E's 'eard all about the way Owen goes on about politics and religion,
an' one thing an' another, an' about the firm scampin' the work.  You
know that sort of talk don't do, does it?'

'Of course not.'

''Unter would 'ave got rid of 'im long ago, but it wasn't 'im as took
'im on in the first place.  It was Rushton 'imself as give 'im a start.
It seems Owen took a lot of samples of 'is work an' showed 'em to the
Bloke.'

'Is them the things wot's 'angin' up in the shop-winder?'

'Yes!' said Crass, contemptuously.  'But 'e's no good on plain work. Of
course 'e does a bit of grainin' an' writin'--after a fashion--when
there's any to do, and that ain't often, but on plain work, why,
Sawkins is as good as 'im for most of it, any day!'

'Yes, I suppose 'e is,' replied Easton, feeling rather ashamed of
himself for the part he was taking in this conversation.

Although he had for the moment forgotten the existence of Bert, Crass
had instinctively lowered his voice, but the boy--who had left off
working to warm his hands by putting them into his trousers
pockets--managed, by listening attentively, to hear every word.

'You know there's plenty of people wouldn't give the firm no more work
if they knowed about it,' Crass continued.  'Just fancy sendin' a b--r
like that to work in a lady's or gentleman's 'ouse--a bloody Atheist!'

'Yes, it is a bit orf, when you look at it like that.'

'I know my missis--for one--wouldn't 'ave a feller like that in our
place.  We 'ad a lodger once and she found out that 'e was a
freethinker or something, and she cleared 'im out, bloody quick, I can
tell yer!'

'Oh, by the way,' said Easton, glad of an opportunity to change the
subject, 'you don't happen to know of anyone as wants a room, do you?
We've got one more than we want, so the wife thought that we might as
well let it.'

Crass thought for a moment.  'Can't say as I do,' he answered,
doubtfully.  'Slyme was talking last week about leaving the place 'e's
lodging at, but I don't know whether 'e's got another place to go to.
You might ask him.  I don't know of anyone else.'

'I'll speak to 'im,' replied Easton.  'What's the time? it must be
nearly on it.'

'So it is: just on eight,' exclaimed Crass, and drawing his whistle he
blew a shrill blast upon it to apprise the others of the fact.

'Has anyone seen old Jack Linden since 'e got the push?' inquired
Harlow during breakfast.

'I seen 'im Saterdy,' said Slyme.

'Is 'e doin' anything?'

'I don't know: I didn't 'ave time to speak to 'im.'

'No, 'e ain't got nothing,' remarked Philpot.  'I seen 'im Saterdy
night, an' 'e told me 'e's been walkin' about ever since.'

Philpot did not add that he had 'lent' Linden a shilling, which he
never expected to see again.

''E won't be able to get a job again in a 'urry,' remarked Easton.
''E's too old.'

'You know, after all, you can't blame Misery for sackin' 'im,' said
Crass after a pause.  ''E was too slow for a funeral.'

'I wonder how much YOU'LL be able to do when you're as old as he is?'
said Owen.

'P'raps I won't want to do nothing,' replied Crass with a feeble laugh.
'I'm goin' to live on me means.'

'I should say the best thing old Jack could do would be to go in the
union,' said Harlow.

'Yes: I reckon that's what'll be the end of it,' said Easton in a
matter-of-fact tone.

'It's a grand finish, isn't it?' observed Owen.  'After working hard
all one's life to be treated like a criminal at the end.'

'I don't know what you call bein' treated like criminals,' exclaimed
Crass.  'I reckon they 'as a bloody fine time of it, an' we've got to
find the money.'

'Oh, for God's sake don't start no more arguments,' cried Harlow,
addressing Owen.  'We 'ad enough of that last week.  You can't expect a
boss to employ a man when 'e's too old to work.'

'Of course not,' said Crass.

Philpot said--nothing.

'I don't see no sense in always grumblin',' Crass proceeded.  'These
things can't be altered.  You can't expect there can be plenty of work
for everyone with all this 'ere labour-savin' machinery what's been
invented.'

'Of course,' said Harlow, 'the people what used to be employed on the
work what's now done by machinery, has to find something else to do.
Some of 'em goes to our trade, for instance: the result is there's too
many at it, and there ain't enough work to keep 'em all goin'.'

'Yes,' cried Crass, eagerly.  'That's just what I say.  Machinery is
the real cause of the poverty.  That's what I said the other day.'

'Machinery is undoubtedly the cause of unemployment,' replied Owen,
'but it's not the cause of poverty: that's another matter altogether.'

The others laughed derisively.

'Well, it seems to me to amount to the same thing,' said Harlow, and
nearly everyone agreed.

'It doesn't seem to me to amount to the same thing,' Owen replied. 'In
my opinion, we are all in a state of poverty even when we have
employment--the condition we are reduced to when we're out of work is
more properly described as destitution.'

'Poverty,' continued Owen after a short silence, 'consists in a
shortage of the necessaries of life.  When those things are so scarce
or so dear that people are unable to obtain sufficient of them to
satisfy all their needs, those people are in a condition of poverty. If
you think that the machinery, which makes it possible to produce all
the necessaries of life in abundance, is the cause of the shortage, it
seems to me that there must be something the matter with your minds.'

'Oh, of course we're all bloody fools except you,' snarled Crass. 'When
they were servin' out the sense, they give you such a 'ell of a lot,
there wasn't none left for nobody else.'

'If there wasn't something wrong with your minds,' continued Owen, 'you
would be able to see that we might have "Plenty of Work" and yet be in
a state of destitution.  The miserable wretches who toil sixteen or
eighteen hours a day--father, mother and even the little
children--making match-boxes, or shirts or blouses, have "plenty of
work", but I for one don't envy them.  Perhaps you think that if there
was no machinery and we all had to work thirteen or fourteen hours a
day in order to obtain a bare living, we should not be in a condition
of poverty?  Talk about there being something the matter with your
minds! If there were not, you wouldn't talk one day about Tariff Reform
as a remedy for unemployment and then the next day admit that Machinery
is the cause of it!  Tariff Reform won't do away with the machinery,
will it?'

'Tariff Reform is the remedy for bad trade,' returned Crass.

'In that case Tariff Reform is the remedy for a disease that does not
exist.  If you would only take the trouble to investigate for yourself
you would find out that trade was never so good as it is at present:
the output--the quantity of commodities of every kind--produced in and
exported from this country is greater than it has ever been before.
The fortunes amassed in business are larger than ever before: but at
the same time--owing, as you have just admitted--to the continued
introduction and extended use of wages-saving machinery, the number of
human beings being employed is steadily decreasing.  I have here,'
continued Owen, taking out his pocket-book, 'some figures which I
copied from the Daily Mail Year Book for 1907, page 33:

'"It is a very noticeable fact that although the number of factories
and their value have vastly increased in the United Kingdom, there is
an absolute decrease in the number of men and women employed in those
factories between 1895 and 1901.  This is doubtless due to the
displacement of hand labour by machinery!"

'Will Tariff Reform deal with that?  Are the good, kind capitalists
going to abandon the use of wages-saving machinery if we tax all
foreign-made goods?  Does what you call "Free Trade" help us here?  Or
do you think that abolishing the House of Lords, or disestablishing the
Church, will enable the workers who are displaced to obtain employment?
Since it IS true--as you admit--that machinery is the principal cause
of unemployment, what are you going to do about it? What's your remedy?'

No one answered, because none of them knew of any remedy: and Crass
began to feel sorry that he had re-introduced the subject at all.

'In the near future,' continued Owen, 'it is probable that horses will
be almost entirely superseded by motor cars and electric trams.  As the
services of horses will be no longer required, all but a few of those
animals will be caused to die out: they will no longer be bred to the
same extent as formerly.  We can't blame the horses for allowing
themselves to be exterminated.  They have not sufficient intelligence
to understand what's being done.  Therefore they will submit tamely to
the extinction of the greater number of their kind.

'As we have seen, a great deal of the work which was formerly done by
human beings is now being done by machinery.  This machinery belongs to
a few people: it is worked for the benefit of those few, just the same
as were the human beings it displaced.  These Few have no longer any
need of the services of so many human workers, so they propose to
exterminate them!  The unnecessary human beings are to be allowed to
starve to death!  And they are also to be taught that it is wrong to
marry and breed children, because the Sacred Few do not require so many
people to work for them as before!'

'Yes, and you'll never be able to prevent it, mate!' shouted Crass.

'Why can't we?'

'Because it can't be done!' cried Crass fiercely.  'It's impossible!'

'You're always sayin' that everything's all wrong,' complained Harlow,
'but why the 'ell don't you tell us 'ow they're goin' to be put right?'

'It doesn't seem to me as if any of you really wish to know.  I believe
that even if it were proved that it could be done, most of you would be
sorry and would do all you could to prevent it.'

''E don't know 'isself,' sneered Crass.  'Accordin' to 'im, Tariff
Reform ain't no bloody good--Free Trade ain't no bloody good, and
everybody else is wrong!  But when you arst 'im what ought to be
done--'e's flummoxed.'

Crass did not feel very satisfied with the result of this machinery
argument, but he consoled himself with the reflection that he would be
able to flatten out his opponent on another subject.  The cutting from
the Obscurer which he had in his pocket would take a bit of answering!
When you have a thing in print--in black and white--why there it is,
and you can't get away from it!  If it wasn't right, a paper like that
would never have printed it.  However, as it was now nearly half past
eight, he resolved to defer this triumph till another occasion.  It was
too good a thing to be disposed of in a hurry.



Chapter 8

The Cap on the Stairs


After breakfast, when they were working together in the drawing-room,
Easton, desiring to do Owen a good turn, thought he would put him on
his guard, and repeated to him in a whisper the substance of the
conversation he had held with Crass concerning him.

'Of course, you needn't mention that I told you, Frank,' he said, 'but
I thought I ought to let you know: you can take it from me, Crass ain't
no friend of yours.'

'I've know that for a long time, mate,' replied Owen.  'Thanks for
telling me, all the same.'

'The bloody rotter's no friend of mine either, or anyone else's, for
that matter,' Easton continued, 'but of course it doesn't do to fall
out with 'im because you never know what he'd go and say to ol' 'Unter.'

'Yes, one has to remember that.'

'Of course we all know what's the matter with 'im as far as YOU'RE
concerned,' Easton went on.  'He don't like 'avin' anyone on the firm
wot knows more about the work than 'e does 'imself--thinks 'e might git
worked out of 'is job.'

Owen laughed bitterly.

'He needn't be afraid of ME on THAT account.  I wouldn't have his job
if it were offered to me.'

'But 'e don't think so,' replied Easton, 'and that's why 'e's got 'is
knife into you.'

'I believe that what he said about Hunter is true enough,' said Owen.
'Every time he comes here he tries to goad me into doing or saying
something that would give him an excuse to tell me to clear out.  I
might have done it before now if I had not guessed what he was after,
and been on my guard.'

Meantime, Crass, in the kitchen, had resumed his seat by the fire with
the purpose of finishing his pipe of tobacco.  Presently he took out
his pocket-book and began to write in it with a piece of black-lead
pencil.  When the pipe was smoked out he knocked the bowl against the
grate to get rid of the ash, and placed the pipe in his waistcoat
pocket.  Then, having torn out the leaf on which he had been writing,
he got up and went into the pantry, where Bert was still struggling
with the old whitewash.

'Ain't yer nearly finished?  I don't want yer to stop in 'ere all day,
yer know.'

'I ain't got much more to do now,' said the boy.  'Just this bit under
the bottom shelf and then I'm done.'

'Yes, and a bloody fine mess you've made, what I can see of it!'
growled Crass.  'Look at all this water on the floor!'

Bert looked guiltily at the floor and turned very red.

'I'll clean it all up', he stammered.  'As soon as I've got this bit of
wall done, I'll wipe all the mess up with the swab.'

Crass now took a pot of paint and some brushes and, having put some
more fuel on the fire, began in a leisurely way to paint some of the
woodwork in the kitchen.  Presently Bert came in.

'I've finished there,' he said.

'About time, too.  You'll 'ave to look a bit livelier than you do, you
know, or me and you will fall out.'

Bert did not answer.

'Now I've got another job for yer.  You're fond of drorin, ain't yer?'
continued Crass in a jeering tone.

'Yes, a little,' replied the boy, shamefacedly.

'Well,' said Crass, giving him the leaf he had torn out of the
pocket-book, 'you can go up to the yard and git them things and put 'em
on a truck and dror it up 'ere, and git back as soon as you can. Just
look at the paper and see if you understand it before you go.  I don't
want you to make no mistakes.'

Bert took the paper and with some difficulty read as follows:

    I pare steppes 8 foot
    1/2 gallon Plastor off perish
    1 pale off witewosh
    12 lbs wite led
    1/2 gallon Linsede Hoil
    Do. Do. turps

'I can make it out all right.'

'You'd better bring the big truck,' said Crass, 'because I want you to
take the venetian blinds with you on it when you take it back tonight.
They've got to be painted at the shop.'

'All right.'

When the boy had departed Crass took a stroll through the house to see
how the others were getting on.  Then he returned to the kitchen and
proceeded with his work.

Crass was about thirty-eight years of age, rather above middle height
and rather stout.  He had a considerable quantity of curly black hair
and wore a short beard of the same colour.  His head was rather large,
but low, and flat on top.  When among his cronies he was in the habit
of referring to his obesity as the result of good nature and a
contented mind.  Behind his back other people attributed it to beer,
some even going to far as to nickname him the 'tank'.

There was no work of a noisy kind being done this morning.  Both the
carpenters and the bricklayers having been taken away, temporarily, to
another 'job'.  At the same time there was not absolute silence:
occasionally Crass could hear the voices of the other workmen as they
spoke to each other, sometimes shouting from one room to another.  Now
and then Harlow's voice rang through the house as he sang snatches of
music-hall songs or a verse of a Moody and Sankey hymn, and
occasionally some of the others joined in the chorus or interrupted the
singer with squeals and catcalls.  Once or twice Crass was on the point
of telling them to make less row: there would be a fine to do if Nimrod
came and heard them.  Just as he had made up his mind to tell them to
stop the noise, it ceased of itself and he heard loud whispers:

'Look out!  Someone's comin'.'

The house became very quiet.

Crass put out his pipe and opened the window and the back door to get
rid of the smell of the tobacco smoke.  Then he shifted the pair of
steps noisily, and proceeded to work more quickly than before.  Most
likely it was old Misery.

He worked on for some time in silence, but no one came to the kitchen:
whoever it was must have gone upstairs.  Crass listened attentively.
Who could it be?  He would have liked to go to see whom it was, but at
the same time, if it were Nimrod, Crass wished to be discovered at
work.  He therefore waited a little longer and presently he heard the
sound of voices upstairs but was unable to recognize them.  He was just
about to go out into the passage to listen, when whoever it was began
coming downstairs.  Crass at once resumed his work.  The footsteps came
along the passage leading to the kitchen: slow, heavy, ponderous
footsteps, but yet the sound was not such as would be made by a man
heavily shod.  It was not Misery, evidently.

As the footsteps entered the kitchen, Crass looked round and beheld a
very tall, obese figure, with a large, fleshy, coarse-featured,
clean-shaven face, and a great double chin, the complexion being of the
colour and appearance of the fat of uncooked bacon.  A very large
fleshy nose and weak-looking pale blue eyes, the slightly inflamed lids
being almost destitute of eye-lashes.  He had large fat feet cased in
soft calfskin boots, with drab- spats.  His overcoat, heavily
trimmed with sealskin, reached just below the knees, and although the
trousers were very wide they were filled by the fat legs within, the
shape of the calves being distinctly perceptible.  Even as the feet
seemed about to burst the uppers of the boots, so the legs appeared to
threaten the trousers with disruption.  This man was so large that his
figure completely filled up the doorway, and as he came in he stooped
slightly to avoid damaging the glittering silk hat on his head.  One
gloved hand was thrust into the pocket of the overcoat and in the other
he carried a small Gladstone bag.

When Crass beheld this being, he touched his cap respectfully.

'Good morning, sir!'

'Good morning.  They told me upstairs that I should find the foreman
here.  Are you the foreman?'

'Yes, sir.'

'I see you're getting on with the work here.'

'Ho yes sir, we're beginning to make a bit hov a show now, sir,'
replied Crass, speaking as if he had a hot potato in his mouth.

'Mr Rushton isn't here yet, I suppose?'

'No, sir: 'e don't horfun come hon the job hin the mornin, sir; 'e
generally comes hafternoons, sir, but Mr 'Unter's halmost sure to be
'ere presently, sir.'

'It's Mr Rushton I want to see: I arranged to meet him here at ten
o'clock; but'--looking at his watch--'I'm rather before my time.'

'He'll be here presently, I suppose,' added Mr Sweater.  'I'll just
take a look round till he comes.'

'Yes, sir,' responded Crass, walking behind him obsequiously as he went
out of the room.

Hoping that the gentleman might give him a shilling, Crass followed him
into the front hall and began explaining what progress had so far been
made with the work, but as Mr Sweater answered only by monosyllables
and grunts, Crass presently concluded that his conversation was not
appreciated and returned to the kitchen.

Meantime, upstairs, Philpot had gone into Newman's room and was
discussing with him the possibility of extracting from Mr Sweater the
price of a little light refreshment.

'I think,' he remarked, 'that we oughter see-ise this 'ere tuneropperty
to touch 'im for an allowance.'

'We won't git nothin' out of 'IM, mate,' returned Newman.  ''E's a
red-'ot teetotaller.'

'That don't matter.  'Ow's 'e to know that we buys beer with it?  We
might 'ave tea, or ginger ale, or lime-juice and glycerine for all 'e
knows!'

Mr Sweater now began ponderously re-ascending the stairs and presently
came into the room where Philpot was.  The latter greeted him with
respectful cordiality:

'Good morning, sir.'

'Good morning.  You've begun painting up here, then.'

'Yes, sir, we've made a start on it,' replied Philpot, affably.

'Is this door wet?' asked Sweater, glancing apprehensively at the
sleeve of his coat.

'Yes, sir,' answered Philpot, and added, as he looked meaningly at the
great man, 'the paint is wet, sir, but the PAINTERS is dry.'

'Confound it!' exclaimed Sweater, ignoring, or not hearing the latter
part of Philpot's reply.  'I've got some of the beastly stuff on my
coat sleeve.'

'Oh, that's nothing, sir,' cried Philpot, secretly delighted.  'I'll
get that orf for yer in no time.  You wait just 'arf a mo!'

He had a piece of clean rag in his tool bag, and there was a can of
turps in the room.  Moistening the rag slightly with turps he carefully
removed the paint from Sweater's sleeve.

'It's all orf now, sir,' he remarked, as he rubbed the place with a dry
part of the rag.  'The smell of the turps will go away in about a
hour's time.'

'Thanks,' said Sweater.

Philpot looked at him wistfully, but Sweater evidently did not
understand, and began looking about the room.

'I see they've put a new piece of skirting here,' he observed.

'Yes, sir,' said Newman, who came into the room just then to get the
turps.  'The old piece was all to bits with dry-rot.'

'I feel as if I 'ad a touch of the dry-rot meself, don't you?' said
Philpot to Newman, who smiled feebly and cast a sidelong glance at
Sweater, who did not appear to notice the significance of the remark,
but walked out of the room and began climbing up to the next floor,
where Harlow and Sawkins were working.

'Well, there's a bleeder for yer!' said Philpot with indignation.
'After all the trouble I took to clean 'is coat!  Not a bloody stiver!
Well, it takes the cake, don't it?'

'I told you 'ow it would be, didn't I?' replied Newman.

'P'raps I didn't make it plain enough,' said Philpot, thoughtfully. 'We
must try to get some of our own back somehow, you know.'

Going out on the landing he called softly upstairs.

'I say, Harlow.'

'Hallo,' said that individual, looking over the banisters.

''Ow are yer getting on up there?'

'Oh, all right, you know.'

'Pretty dry job, ain't it?' Philpot continued, raising his voice a
little and winking at Harlow.

'Yes, it is, rather,' replied Harlow with a grin.

'I think this would be a very good time to take up the collection,
don't you?'

'Yes, it wouldn't be a bad idear.'

'Well, I'll put me cap on the stairs,' said Philpot, suiting the action
to the word.  'You never knows yer luck.  Things is gettin' a bit
serious on this floor, you know; my mate's fainted away once already!'

Philpot now went back to his room to await developments: but as Sweater
made no sign, he returned to the landing and again hailed Harlow.

'I always reckon a man can work all the better after 'e's 'ad a drink:
you can seem to get over more of it, like.'

'Oh, that's true enough,' responded Harlow.  'I've often noticed it
meself.'

Sweater came out of the front bedroom and passed into one of the back
rooms without any notice of either of the men.

'I'm afraid it's a frost, mate,' Harlow whispered, and Philpot, shaking
his head sadly, returned to work; but in a little while he came out
again and once more accosted Harlow.

'I knowed a case once,' he said in a melancholy tone, 'where a chap
died--of thirst--on a job just like this; and at the inquest the doctor
said as 'arf a pint would 'a saved 'im!'

'It must 'ave been a norrible death,' remarked Harlow.

''Orrible ain't the work for it, mate,' replied Philpot, mournfully.
'It was something chronic!'

After this final heartrending appeal to Sweater's humanity they
returned to work, satisfied that, whatever the result of their efforts,
they had done their best.  They had placed the matter fully and fairly
before him: nothing more could be said: the issue now rested entirely
with him.

But it was all in vain.  Sweater either did not or would not
understand, and when he came downstairs he took no notice whatever of
the cap which Philpot had placed so conspicuously in the centre of the
landing floor.



Chapter 9

Who is to Pay?


Sweater reached the hall almost at the same moment that Rushton entered
by the front door.  They greeted each other in a friendly way and after
a few remarks concerning the work that was being done, they went into
the drawing-room where Owen and Easton were and Rushton said:

'What about this room?  Have you made up your mind what you're going to
have done to it?'

'Yes,' replied Sweater; 'but I'll tell you about that afterwards. What
I'm anxious about is the drains.  Have you brought the plans?'

'Yes.'

'What's it going to cost?'

'Just wait a minute,' said Rushton, with a slight gesture calling
Sweater's attention to the presence of the two workmen.  Sweater
understood.

'You might leave that for a few minutes, will you?' Rushton continued,
addressing Owen and Easton.  'Go and get on with something else for a
little while.'

When they were alone, Rushton closed the door and remarked: 'It's
always as well not to let these fellows know more than is necessary.'

Sweater agreed.

'Now this 'ere drain work is really two separate jobs,' said Rushton.
'First, the drains of the house: that is, the part of the work that'
actually on your ground.  When that's done, there will 'ave to be a
pipe carried right along under this private road to the main road to
connect the drains of the house with the town main.  You follow me?'

'Perfectly.  What's it going to cost for the lot?'

'For the drains of the house, L25.0.0. and for the connecting pipe
L30.0.0.  L55.0.0. for the lot.'

'Um!  That the lower you can do it for, eh?'

'That's the lowest.  I've figured it out most carefully, the time and
materials, and that's practically all I'm charging you.'

The truth of the matter was that Rushton had had nothing whatever to do
with estimating the cost of this work: he had not the necessary
knowledge to do so.  Hunter had drawn the plans, calculated the cost
and prepared the estimate.

'I've been thinking over this business lately,' said Sweater, looking
at Rushton with a cunning leer.  'I don't see why I should have to pay
for the connecting pipe.  The Corporation ought to pay for that.  What
do you say?'

Rushton laughed.  'I don't see why not,' he replied.

'I think we could arrange it all right, don't you?' Sweater went on.
'Anyhow, the work will have to be done, so you'd better let 'em get on
with it.  L55.0.0. covers both jobs, you say?'

'Yes.'

'Oh, all right, you get on with it and we'll see what can be done with
the Corporation later on.'

'I don't suppose we'll find 'em very difficult to deal with,' said
Rushton with a grin, and Sweater smiled agreement.

As they were passing through the hall they met Hunter, who had just
arrived.  He was rather surprised to see them, as he knew nothing of
their appointment.  He wished them 'Good morning' in an awkward
hesitating undertone as if he were doubtful how his greeting would be
received.  Sweater nodded slightly, but Rushton ignored him altogether
and Nimrod passed on looking and feeling like a disreputable cur that
had just been kicked.

As Sweater and Rushton walked together about the house, Hunter hovered
about them at a respectable distance, hoping that presently some notice
might be taken of him.  His dismal countenance became even longer than
usual when he observed that they were about to leave the house without
appearing even to know that he was there.  However, just as they were
going out, Rushton paused on the threshold and called him:

'Mr Hunter!'

'Yes, sir.'

Nimrod ran to him like a dog taken notice of by his master: if he had
possessed a tail, it is probable that he would have wagged it. Rushton
gave him the plans with an intimation that the work was to be proceeded
with.

For some time after they were gone, Hunter crawled silently about the
house, in and out of the rooms, up and down the corridors  and the
staircases.  After a while he went into the room where Newman was and
stood quietly watching him for about ten minutes as he worked.  The man
was painting the skirting, and just then he came to a part that was
split in several places, so he took his knife and began to fill the
cracks with putty.  He was so nervous under Hunter's scrutiny that his
hand trembled to such an extent that it took him about twice as long as
it should have done, and Hunter told him so with brutal directness.

'Never mind about puttying up such little cracks as them!' he shouted.
'Fill 'em up with the paint.   We can't afford to pay you for messing
about like that!'

Newman made no reply.

Misery found no excuse for bullying anyone else, because they were all
tearing into it for all they were worth.  As he wandered up and down
the house like an evil spirit, he was followed by the furtively
unfriendly glances of the men, who cursed him in their hearts as he
passed.

He sneaked into the drawing-room and after standing with a malignant
expression, silently watching Owen and Easton, he came out again
without having uttered a word.

Although he frequently acted in this manner, yet somehow today the
circumstance worried Owen considerably.  He wondered uneasily what it
meant, and began to feel vaguely apprehensive.  Hunter's silence seemed
more menacing than his speech.



Chapter 10

The Long Hill


Bert arrived at the shop and with as little delay as possible loaded up
the handcart with all the things he had been sent for and started on the
return journey.  He got on all right in the town, because the roads
were level and smooth, being paved with wood blocks.  If it had only
been like that all the way it would have been easy enough, although he
was a small boy for such a large truck, and such a heavy load.  While
the wood road lasted the principal trouble he experienced was the
difficulty of seeing where he was going, the handcart being so high and
himself so short.  The pair of steps on the cart of course made it all
the worse in that respect.  However, by taking great care he managed to
get through the town all right, although he narrowly escaped colliding
with several vehicles, including two or three motor cars and an
electric tram, besides nearly knocking over an old woman who was
carrying a large bundle of washing.  From time to time he saw other
small boys of his acquaintance, some of them former schoolmates. Some
of these passed by carrying heavy loads of groceries in baskets, and
others with wooden trays full of joints of meat.

Unfortunately, the wood paving ceased at the very place where the
ground began to rise.  Bert now found himself at the beginning of a
long stretch of macadamized road which rose slightly and persistently
throughout its whole length.  Bert had pushed a cart up this road many
times before and consequently knew the best method of tackling it.
Experience had taught him that a full frontal attack on this hill was
liable to failure, so on this occasion he followed his usual plan of
making diagonal movements, crossing the road repeatedly from right to
left and left to right, after the fashion of a sailing ship tacking
against the wind, and halting about every twenty yards to rest and take
breath.  The distance he was to go was regulated, not so much by his
powers of endurance as by the various objects by the wayside--the
lamp-posts, for instance.  During each rest he used to look ahead and
select a certain lamp-post or street corner as the next stopping-place,
and when he start again he used to make the most strenuous and
desperate efforts to reach it.

Generally the goal he selected was too distant, for he usually
overestimated his strength, and whenever he was forced to give in he
ran the truck against the kerb and stood there panting for breath and
feeling profoundly disappointed at his failure.

On the present occasion, during one of these rests, it flashed upon him
that he was being a very long time: he would have to buck up or he
would get into a row: he was not even half-way up the road yet!

Selecting a distant lamp-post, he determined to reach it before resting
again.

The cart had a single shaft with a cross-piece at the end, forming the
handle: he gripped this fiercely with both hands and, placing his chest
against it, with a mighty effort he pushed the cart before him.

It seemed to get heavier and heavier every foot of the way.  His whole
body, but especially the thighs and calves of his legs, pained
terribly, but still he strained and struggled and said to himself that
he would not give in until he reached the lamp-post.

Finding that the handle hurt his chest, he lowered it to his waist, but
that being even more painful he raised it again to his chest, and
struggled savagely on, panting for breath and with his heart beating
wildly.

The cart became heavier and heavier.  After a while it seemed to the
boy as if there were someone at the front of it trying to push him back
down the hill.  This was such a funny idea that for a moment he felt
inclined to laugh, but the inclination went almost as soon as it came
and was replaced by the dread that he would not be able to hold out
long enough to reach the lamp-post, after all.  Clenching his teeth, he
made a tremendous effort and staggered forward two or three more steps
and then--the cart stopped.  He struggled with it despairingly for a
few seconds, but all the strength had suddenly gone out of him: his
legs felt so weak that he nearly collapsed on to the ground, and the
cart began to move backwards down the hill.  He was just able to stick
to it and guide it so that it ran into and rested against the kerb, and
then he stood holding it in a half-dazed way, very pale, saturated with
perspiration, and trembling.  His legs in particular shook so much that
he felt that unless he could sit down for a little, he would FALL down.

He lowered the handle very carefully so as not to spill the whitewash
out of the pail which was hanging from a hook under the cart, then,
sitting down on the kerbstone, he leaned wearily against the wheel.

A little way down the road was a church with a clock in the tower.  It
was five minutes to ten by this clock.  Bert said to himself that when
it was ten he would make another start.

Whilst he was resting he thought of many things.  Just behind that
church was a field with several ponds in it where he used to go with
other boys to catch effets.  If it were not for the cart he would go
across now, to see whether there were any there still.  He remembered
that he had been very eager to leave school and go to work, but they
used to be fine old times after all.

Then he thought of the day when his mother took him to Mr Rushton's
office to 'bind' him.  He remembered that day very vividly: it was
almost a year ago.  How nervous he had been!  His hand had trembled so
that he was scarcely able to hold the pen.  And even when it was all
over, they had both felt very miserable, somehow.  His mother had been
very nervous in the office also, and when they got home she cried a lot
and called him her poor little fatherless boy, and said she hoped he
would be good and try to learn.  And then he cried as well, and
promised her that he would do his best.  He reflected with pride that
he was keeping his promise about being a good boy and trying to learn:
in fact, he knew a great deal about the trade already--he could paint
back doors as well as anybody! and railings as well.  Owen had taught
him lots of things and had promised to do some patterns of graining for
him so that he might practise copying them at home in the evenings.
Owen was a fine chap.  Bert resolved that he would tell him what Crass
had been saying to Easton.  Just fancy, the cheek of a rotter like
Crass, trying to get Owen the sack!  It would be more like it if Crass
was to be sacked himself, so that Owen could be the foreman.

One minute to ten.

With a heavy heart Bert watched the clock.  His legs were still aching
very badly.  He could not see the hands of the clock moving, but they
were creeping on all the same.  Now, the minute hand was over the edge
of the number, and he began to deliberate whether he might not rest for
another five minutes?  But he had been such a long time already on his
errand that he dismissed the thought.  The minute hand was now upright
and it was time to go on.

Just as he was about to get up a harsh voice behind him said:

'How much longer are you going to sit there?'

Bert started up guiltily, and found himself confronted by Mr Rushton,
who was regarding him with an angry frown, whilst close by towered the
colossal figure of the obese Sweater, the expression on his greasy
countenance betokening the pain he experienced on beholding such as
appalling example of juvenile depravity.

'What do you mean by sich conduct?' demanded Rushton, indignantly. 'The
idear of sitting there like that when most likely the men are waiting
for them things?'

Crimson with shame and confusion, the boy made no reply.

'You've been there a long time,' continued Rushton, 'I've been watchin'
you all the time I've been comin' down the road.'

Bert tried to speak to explain why he had been resting, but his mouth
and his tongue had become quite parched from terror and he was unable
to articulate a single word.

'You know, that's not the way to get on in life, my boy,' observed
Sweater lifting his forefinger and shaking his fat head reproachfully.

'Get along with you at once!' Rushton said, roughly.  'I'm surprised at
yer!  The idear!  Sitting down in my time!'

This was quite true.  Rushton was not merely angry, but astonished at
the audacity of the boy.  That anyone in his employment should dare to
have the impertinence to sit down in his time was incredible.

The boy lifted the handle of the cart and once more began to push it up
the hill.  It seemed heavier now that ever, but he managed to get on
somehow.  He kept glancing back after Rushton and Sweater, who
presently turned a corner and were lost to view: then he ran the cart
to the kerb again to have a breathe.  He couldn't have kept up much
further without a spell even if they had still been watching him, but
he didn't rest for more than about half a minute this time, because he
was afraid they might be peeping round the corner at him.

After this he gave up the lamp-post system and halted for a minute or
so at regular short intervals.  In this way, he at length reached the
top of the hill, and with a sigh of relief congratulated himself that
the journey was practically over.

Just before he arrived at the gate of the house, he saw Hunter sneak
out and mount his bicycle and ride away.  Bert wheeled his cart up to
the front door and began carrying in the things.  Whilst thus engaged
he noticed Philpot peeping cautiously over the banisters of the
staircase, and called out to him:

'Give us a hand with this bucket of whitewash, will yer, Joe?'

'Certainly, me son, with the greatest of hagony,' replied Philpot as he
hurried down the stairs.

As they were carrying it in Philpot winked at Bert and whispered:

'Did yer see Pontius Pilate anywheres outside?'

''E went away on 'is bike just as I come in at the gate.'

'Did 'e?  Thank Gord for that!  I don't wish 'im no 'arm,' said
Philpot, fervently, 'but I 'opes 'e gets runned over with a motor.'

In this wish Bert entirely concurred, and similar charitable sentiments
were expressed by all the others as soon as they heard that Misery was
gone.

Just before four o'clock that afternoon Bert began to load up the truck
with the venetian blinds, which had been taken down some days
previously.

'I wonder who'll have the job of paintin' 'em?' remarked Philpot to
Newman.

'P'raps's they'll take a couple of us away from ere.'

'I shouldn't think so.  We're short-'anded 'ere already.  Most likely
they'll put on a couple of fresh 'ands.  There's a 'ell of a lot of
work in all them blinds, you know: I reckon they'll 'ave to 'ave three
or four coats, the state they're in.'

'Yes.  No doubt that's what will be done,' replied Newman, and added
with a mirthless laugh:

'I don't suppose they'll have much difficulty in getting a couple of
chaps.'

'No, you're right, mate.  There's plenty of 'em walkin' about as a
week's work would be a Gordsend to.'

'Come to think of it,' continued Newman after a pause, 'I believe the
firm used to give all their blind work to old Latham, the venetian
blind maker.  Prap's they'll give 'im this lot to do.'

'Very likely,' replied Philpot, 'I should think 'e can do 'em cheaper
even than us chaps, and that's all the firm cares about.'

How far their conjectures were fulfilled will appear later.

Shortly after Bert was gone it became so dark that it was necessary to
light the candles, and Philpot remarked that although he hated working
under such conditions, yet he was always glad when lighting up time
came, because then knocking off time was not very far behind.

About five minutes to five, just as they were all putting their things
away for the night, Nimrod suddenly appeared in the house.  He had come
hoping to find some of them ready dressed to go home before the proper
time.  Having failed in this laudable enterprise, he stood silently by
himself for some seconds in the drawing-room.  This was a spacious and
lofty apartment with a large semicircular bay window. Round the ceiling
was a deep cornice.  In the semi-darkness the room appeared to be of
even greater proportions than it really was.  After standing thinking
in this room for a little while, Hunter turned and strode out to the
kitchen, where the men were preparing to go home. Owen was taking off
his blouse and apron as the other entered.  Hunter addressed him with a
malevolent snarl:

'You can call at the office tonight as you go home.'

Owen's heart seemed to stop beating.  All the petty annoyances he had
endured from Hunter rushed into his memory, together with what Easton
had told him that morning.  He stood, still and speechless, holding his
apron in his hand and staring at the manager.

'What for?' he ejaculated at length.  'What's the matter?'

'You'll find out what you're wanted for when you get there,' returned
Hunter as he went out of the room and away from the house.

When he was gone a dead silence prevailed.  The hands ceased their
preparations for departure and looked at each other and at Owen in
astonishment.  To stand a man off like that--when the job was not half
finished--and for no apparent reason: and of a Monday, too.  It was
unheard of.  There was a general chorus of indignation.  Harlow and
Philpot especially were very wroth.

'If it comes to that,' Harlow shouted, 'they've got no bloody right to
do it!  We're entitled to an hour's notice.'

'Of course we are!' cried Philpot, his goggle eyes rolling wildly with
wrath.  'And I should 'ave it too, if it was me.  You take my tip,
Frank: CHARGE UP TO SIX O'CLOCK on yer time sheet and get some of your
own back.'

Everyone joined in the outburst of indignant protest.  Everyone, that
is, except Crass and Slyme.  But then they were not exactly in the
kitchen: they were out in the scullery putting their things away, and
so it happened that they said nothing, although they exchanged
significant looks.

Owen had by this time recovered his self-possession.  He collected all
his tools and put them with his apron and blouse into his tool-bag with
the purpose of taking them with him that night, but on reflection he
resolved not to do so.  After all, it was not absolutely certain that
he was going to be 'stood off': possibly they were going to send him on
some other job.

They kept all together--some walking on the pavement and some in the
road--until they got down town, and then separated.  Crass, Sawkins,
Bundy and Philpot adjourned to the 'Cricketers' for a drink, Newman
went on by himself, Slyme accompanied Easton who had arranged with him
to come that night to see the bedroom, and Owen went in the direction
of the office.



Chapter 11

Hands and Brains


Rushton & Co.'s premises were situated in one of the principal streets
of Mugsborough and consisted of a double-fronted shop with plate glass
windows.  The shop extended right through to the narrow back street
which ran behind it.  The front part of the shop was stocked with
wall-hangings, mouldings, stands showing patterns of embossed wall and
ceiling decorations, cases of brushes, tins of varnish and enamel, and
similar things.

The office was at the rear and was separated from the rest of the shop
by a partition, glazed with muranese obscured glass.  This office had
two doors, one in the partition, giving access to the front shop, and
the other by the side of the window and opening on to the back street.
The glass of the lower sash of the back window consisted of one large
pane on which was painted 'Rushton & Co.' in black letters on a white
ground.

Owen stood outside this window for two or three seconds before
knocking.  There was a bright light in the office.  Then he knocked at
the door, which was at once opened from the inside by Hunter, and Owen
went in.

Rushton was seated in an armchair at his desk, smoking a cigar and
reading one of several letters that were lying before him.  At the back
was a large unframed photograph of the size known as half-plate of the
interior of some building.  At another desk, or rather table, at the
other side of the office, a young woman was sitting writing in a large
ledger.  There was a typewriting machine on the table at her side.

Rushton glanced up carelessly as Owen came in, but took no further
notice of him.

'Just wait a minute,' Hunter said to Owen, and then, after conversing
in a low tone with Rushton for a few minutes, the foreman put on his
hat and went out of the office through the partition door which led
into the front shop.

Owen stood waiting for Rushton to speak.  He wondered why Hunter had
sneaked off and felt inclined to open the door and call him back.  One
thing he was determined about: he meant to have some explanation: he
would not submit tamely to be dismissed without any just reason.

When he had finished reading the letter, Rushton looked up, and,
leaning comfortably back in his chair, he blew a cloud of smoke from
his cigar, and said in an affable, indulgent tone, such as one might
use to a child:

'You're a bit of a hartist, ain't yer?'

Owen was so surprised at this reception that he was for the moment
unable to reply.

'You know what I mean,' continued Rushton; 'decorating work, something
like them samples of yours what's hanging up there.'

He noticed the embarrassment of Owen's manner, and was gratified.  He
thought the man was confused at being spoken to by such a superior
person as himself.

Mr Rushton was about thirty-five years of age, with light grey eyes,
fair hair and moustache, and his complexion was a whitey drab.  He was
tall--about five feet ten inches--and rather clumsily built; not
corpulent, but fat--in good condition.  He appeared to be very well fed
and well cared for generally.  His clothes were well made, of good
quality and fitted him perfectly.  He was dressed in a grey Norfolk
suit, dark brown boots and knitted woollen stockings reaching to the
knee.

He was a man who took himself very seriously.  There was an air of
pomposity and arrogant importance about him which--considering who and
what he was--would have been entertaining to any observer gifted with a
sense of humour.

'Yes,' replied Owen at last.  'I can do a little of that sort of work,
although of course I don't profess to be able to do it as well or as
quickly as a man who does nothing else.'

'Oh, no, of course not, but I think you could manage this all right.
It's that drawing-room at the 'Cave'.  Mr Sweater's been speaking to me
about it.  It seems that when he was over in Paris some time since he
saw a room that took his fancy.  The walls and ceiling was not papered,
but painted: you know what I mean; sort of panelled out, and decorated
with stencils and hand painting.  This 'ere's a photer of it: it's done
in a sort of JAPANESE fashion.'

He handed the photograph to Owen as he spoke.  It represented a room,
the walls and ceiling of which were decorated in a Moorish style.

'At first Mr Sweater thought of getting a firm from London to do it,
but 'e gave up the idear on account of the expense; but if you can do
it so that it doesn't cost too much, I think I can persuade 'im to go
in for it.  But if it's goin' to cost a lot it won't come off at all.
'E'll just 'ave a frieze put up and 'ave the room papered in the
ordinary way.'

This was not true: Rushton said it in case Owen might want to be paid
extra wages while doing the work.  The truth was that Sweater was going
to have the room decorated in any case, and intended to get a London
firm to do it.  He had consented rather unwillingly to let Rushton &
Co. submit him an estimate, because he thought they would not be able
to do the work satisfactorily.

Owen examined the photograph closely.

'Could you do anything like that in that room?'

'Yes, I think so,' replied Owen.

'Well, you know, I don't want you to start on the job and not be able
to finish it.  Can you do it or not?'

Rushton felt sure that Owen could do it, and was very desirous that he
should undertake it, but he did not want him to know that.  He wished
to convey the impression that he was almost indifferent whether Owen
did the work or not.  In fact, he wished to seem to be conferring a
favour upon him by procuring him such a nice job as this.

'I'll tell you what I CAN do,' Owen replied.  'I can make you a
watercolour sketch--a design--and if you think it good enough, of
course, I can reproduce it on the ceiling and the walls, and I can let
you know, within a little, how long it will take.'

Rushton appeared to reflect.  Owen stood examining the photograph and
began to feel an intense desire to do the work.

Rushton shook his head dubiously.

'If I let you spend a lot of time over the sketches and then Mr Sweater
does not approve of your design, where do I come in?'

'Well, suppose we put it like this: I'll draw the design at home in the
evenings--in my own time.  If it's accepted, I'll charge you for the
time I've spent upon it.  If it's not suitable, I won't charge the time
at all.'

Rushton brightened up considerably.  'All right.  You can do so,' he
said with an affectation of good nature, 'but you mustn't pile it on
too thick, in any case, you know, because, as I said before, 'e don't
want to spend too much money on it.  In fact, if it's going to cost a
great deal 'e simply won't 'ave it done at all.'

Rushton knew Owen well enough to be sure that no consideration of time
or pains would prevent him from putting the very best that was in him
into this work.  He knew that if the man did the room at all there was
no likelihood of his scamping it for the sake of getting it done
quickly; and for that matter Rushton did not wish him to hurry over it.
All that he wanted to do was to impress upon Owen from the very first
that he must not charge too much time.  Any profit that it was possible
to make out of the work, Rushton meant to secure for himself. He was a
smart man, this Rushton, he possessed the ideal character: the kind of
character that is necessary for any man who wishes to succeed in
business--to get on in life.  In other words, his disposition was very
similar to that of a pig--he was intensely selfish.

No one had any right to condemn him for this, because all who live
under the present system practise selfishness, more or less.  We must
be selfish: the System demands it.  We must be selfish or we shall be
hungry and ragged and finally die in the gutter.  The more selfish we
are the better off we shall be.  In the 'Battle of Life' only the
selfish and cunning are able to survive: all others are beaten down and
trampled under foot.  No one can justly be blamed for acting
selfishly--it is a matter of self-preservation--we must either injure
or be injured.  It is the system that deserves to be blamed. What those
who wish to perpetuate the system deserve is another question.

'When do you think you'll have the drawings ready?' inquired Rushton.
'Can you get them done tonight?'

'I'm afraid not,' replied Owen, feeling inclined to laugh at the
absurdity of the question.  'It will need a little thinking about.'

'When can you have them ready then?  This is Monday.  Wednesday
morning?'

Owen hesitated.

'We don't want to keep 'im waiting too long, you know, or 'e may give
up the idear altogether.'

'Well, say Friday morning, then,' said Owen, resolving that he would
stay up all night if necessary to get it done.

Rushton shook his head.

'Can't you get it done before that?  I'm afraid that if we keeps 'im
waiting all that time we may lose the job altogether.'

'I can't get them done any quicker in my spare time,' returned Owen,
flushing.  'If you like to let me stay home tomorrow and charge the
time the same as if I had gone to work at the house, I could go to my
ordinary work on Wednesday and let you have the drawings on Thursday
morning.'

'Oh, all right,' said Rushton as he returned to the perusal of his
letters.

That night, long after his wife and Frankie were asleep, Owen worked in
the sitting-room, searching through old numbers of the Decorators'
Journal and through the illustrations in other books of designs for
examples of Moorish work, and making rough sketches in pencil.

He did not attempt to finish anything yet: it was necessary to think
first; but he roughed out the general plan, and when at last he did go
to bed he could not sleep for a long time.  He almost fancied he was in
the drawing-room at the 'Cave'.  First of all it would be necessary to
take down the ugly plaster centre flower with its crevices all filled
up with old whitewash.  The cornice was all right; it was fortunately a
very simple one, with a deep cove and without many enrichments.  Then,
when the walls and the ceiling had been properly prepared, the
ornamentation would be proceeded with.  The walls, divided into panels
and arches containing painted designs and lattice-work; the panels of
the door decorated in a similar manner. The mouldings of the door and
window frames picked out with colours and gold so as to be in character
with the other work; the cove of the cornice, a dull yellow with a bold
ornament in colour--gold was not advisable in the hollow because of the
unequal distribution of the light, but some of the smaller mouldings of
the cornice should be gold.  On the ceiling there would be one large
panel covered with an appropriate design in gold and colours and
surrounded by a wide margin or border.  To separate this margin from
the centre panel there would be a narrow border, and another
border--but wider--round the outer edge of the margin, where the
ceiling met the cornice.  Both these borders and the margin would be
covered with ornamentation in colour and gold.  Great care would be
necessary when deciding what parts were to be gilded because--whilst
large masses of gilding are apt to look garish and in bad taste--a lot
of fine gold lines are ineffective, especially on a flat surface, where
they do not always catch the light.  Process by process he traced the
work, and saw it advancing stage by stage until, finally, the large
apartment was transformed and glorified.  And then in the midst of the
pleasure he experienced in the planning of the work there came the fear
that perhaps they would not have it done at all.

The question, what personal advantage would he gain never once occurred
to Owen.  He simply wanted to do the work; and he was so fully occupied
with thinking and planning how it was to be done that the question of
profit was crowded out.

But although this question of what profit could be made out of the work
never occurred to Owen, it would in due course by fully considered by
Mr Rushton.  In fact, it was the only thing about the work that Mr
Rushton would think of at all: how much money could be made out of it.
This is what is meant by the oft-quoted saying, 'The men work with
their hands--the master works with his brains.'



Chapter 12

The Letting of the Room


It will be remembered that when the men separated, Owen going to the
office to see Rushton, and the others on their several ways, Easton and
Slyme went together.

During the day Easton had found an opportunity of speaking to him about
the bedroom.  Slyme was about to leave the place where he was at
present lodging, and he told Easton that although he had almost decided
on another place he would take a look at the room.  At Easton's
suggestion they arranged that Slyme was to accompany him home that
night.  As the former remarked, Slyme could come to see the place, and
if he didn't like it as well as the other he was thinking of taking,
there was no harm done.

Ruth had contrived to furnish the room.  Some of the things she had
obtained on credit from a second-hand furniture dealer.  Exactly how
she had managed, Easton did not know, but it was done.

'This is the house,' said Easton.  As they passed through, the gate
creaked loudly on its hinges and then closed of itself rather noisily.

Ruth had just been putting the child to sleep and she stood up as they
came in, hastily fastening the bodice of her dress as she did so.

'I've brought a gentleman to see you,' said Easton.

Although she knew that he was looking out for someone for the room,
Ruth had not expected him to bring anyone home in this sudden manner,
and she could not help wishing that he had told her beforehand of his
intention.  It being Monday, she had been very busy all day and she was
conscious that she was rather untidy in her appearance.  Her long brown
hair was twisted loosely into a coil behind her head.  She blushed in
an embarrassed way as the young man stared at her.

Easton introduced Slyme by name and they shook hands; and then at
Ruth's suggestion Easton took a light to show him the room, and while
they were gone Ruth hurriedly tidied her hair and dress.

When they came down again Slyme said he thought the room would suit him
very well.  What were the terms?

Did he wish to take the room only--just to lodge? inquired Ruth, or
would he prefer to board as well?

Slyme intimated that he desired the latter arrangement.

In that case she thought twelve shillings a week would be fair.  She
believed that was about the usual amount.  Of course that would include
washing, and if his clothes needed a little mending she would do it for
him.

Slyme expressed himself satisfied with these terms, which were as Ruth
had said--about the usual ones.  He would take the room, but he was not
leaving his present lodgings until Saturday.  It was therefore agreed
that he was to bring his box on Saturday evening.

When he had gone, Easton and Ruth stood looking at each other in
silence.  Ever since this plan of letting the room first occurred to
them they had been very anxious to accomplish it; and yet, now that it
was done, they felt dissatisfied and unhappy, as if they had suddenly
experienced some irreparable misfortune.  In that moment they
remembered nothing of the darker side of their life together.  The hard
times and the privations were far off and seemed insignificant beside
the fact that this stranger was for the future to share their home.  To
Ruth especially it seemed that the happiness of the past twelve months
had suddenly come to an end.  She shrank with involuntary aversion and
apprehension from the picture that rose before her of the future in
which this intruder appeared the most prominent figure, dominating
everything and interfering with every detail of their home life.  Of
course they had known all this before, but somehow it had never seemed
so objectionable as it did now, and as Easton thought of it he was
filled an unreasonable resentment against Slyme, as if the latter had
forced himself upon them against their will.

'Damn him!' he thought.  'I wish I'd never brought him here at all!'

Ruth did not appear to him to be very happy about it either.

'Well?' he said at last.  'What do you think of him?'

'Oh, he'll be all right, I suppose.'

'For my part, I wish he wasn't coming,' Easton continued.

'That's just what I was thinking,' replied Ruth dejectedly.  'I don't
like him at all.  I seemed to turn against him directly he came in the
door.'

'I've a good mind to back out of it, somehow, tomorrow,' exclaimed
Easton after another silence.  'I could tell him we've unexpectedly got
some friends coming to stay with us.'

'Yes,' said Ruth eagerly.  'It would be easy enough to make some excuse
or other.'

As this way of escape presented itself she felt as if a weight had been
lifted from her mind, but almost in the same instant she remembered the
reasons which had at first led them to think of letting the room, and
she added, disconsolately:

'It's foolish for us to go on like this, dear.  We must let the room
and it might just as well be him as anyone else.  We must make the best
of it, that's all.'

Easton stood with his back to the fire, staring gloomily at her.

'Yes, I suppose that's the right way to look at it,' he replied at
length.  'If we can't stand it, we'll give up the house and take a
couple of rooms, or a small flat--if we can get one.'

Ruth agreed, although neither alternative was very inviting.  The
unwelcome alteration in their circumstances was after all not
altogether without its compensations, because from the moment of
arriving at this decision their love for each other seemed to be
renewed and intensified.  They remembered with acute regret that
hitherto they had not always fully appreciated the happiness of that
exclusive companionship of which there now remained to them but one
week more.  For once the present was esteemed at its proper value,
being invested with some of the glamour which almost always envelops
the past.



Chapter 13

Penal Servitude and Death


On Tuesday--the day after his interview with Rushton--Owen remained at
home working at the drawings.  He did not get them finished, but they
were so far advanced that he thought he would be able to complete them
after tea on Wednesday evening.  He did not go to work until after
breakfast on Wednesday and his continued absence served to confirm the
opinion of the other workmen that he had been discharged. This belief
was further strengthened by the fact that a new hand had been sent to
the house by Hunter, who came himself also at about a quarter past
seven and very nearly caught Philpot in the act of smoking.

During breakfast, Philpot, addressing Crass and referring to Hunter,
inquired anxiously:

''Ow's 'is temper this mornin', Bob?'

'As mild as milk,' replied Crass.  'You'd think butter wouldn't melt in
'is mouth.'

'Seemed quite pleased with 'isself, didn't 'e?' said Harlow.

'Yes,' remarked Newman.  ''E said good morning to me!'

'So 'e did to me!' said Easton.  ''E come inter the drorin'-room an' 'e
ses, "Oh, you're in 'ere are yer, Easton," 'e ses--just like that,
quite affable like.  So I ses, "Yes, sir."  "Well," 'e ses, "get it
slobbered over as quick as you can," 'e ses, "'cos we ain't got much
for this job: don't spend a lot of time puttying up.  Just smear it
over an' let it go!"'

''E certinly seemed very pleased about something,' said Harlow.  'I
thought prap's there was a undertaking job in: one o' them generally
puts 'im in a good humour.'

'I believe that nothing would please 'im so much as to see a epidemic
break out,' remarked Philpot.  'Small-pox, Hinfluenza, Cholery morbus,
or anything like that.'

'Yes: don't you remember 'ow good-tempered 'e was last summer when
there was such a lot of Scarlet Fever about?' observed Harlow.

'Yes,' said Crass with a chuckle.  'I recollect we 'ad six children's
funerals to do in one week.  Ole Misery was as pleased as Punch,
because of course as a rule there ain't many boxin'-up jobs in the
summer.  It's in winter as hundertakers reaps their 'arvest.'

'We ain't 'ad very many this winter, though, so far,' said Harlow.

'Not so many as usual,' admitted Crass, 'but still, we can't grumble:
we've 'ad one nearly every week since the beginning of October. That's
not so bad, you know.'

Crass took a lively interest in the undertaking department of Rushton &
Co.'s business.  He always had the job of polishing or varnishing the
coffin and assisting to take it home and to 'lift in' the corpse,
besides acting as one of the bearers at the funeral.  This work was
more highly paid for than painting.

'But I don't think there's no funeral job in,' added Crass after a
pause.  'I think it's because 'e's glad to see the end of Owen, if yeh
ask me.'

'Praps that 'as got something to do with it,' said Harlow.  'But all
the same I don't call that a proper way to treat anyone--givin' a man
the push in that way just because 'e 'appened to 'ave a spite against
'im.'

'It's wot I call a bl--dy shame!' cried Philpot.  'Owen's a chap wots
always ready to do a good turn to anybody, and 'e knows 'is work,
although 'e is a bit of a nuisance sometimes, I must admit, when 'e
gets on about Socialism.'

'I suppose Misery didn't say nothin' about 'im this mornin'?' inquired
Easton.

'No,' replied Crass, and added: 'I only 'ope Owen don't think as I
never said anything against 'im.  'E looked at me very funny that night
after Nimrod went away.  Owen needn't think nothing like that about ME,
because I'm a chap like this--if I couldn't do nobody no good, I
wouldn't never do 'em no 'arm!'

At this some of the others furtively exchanged significant glances, and
Harlow began to smile, but no one said anything.

Philpot, noticing that the newcomer had not helped himself to any tea,
called Bert's attention to the fact and the boy filled Owen's cup and
passed it over to the new hand.

Their conjectures regarding the cause of Hunter's good humour were all
wrong.  As the reader knows, Owen had not been discharged at all, and
there was nobody dead.  The real reason was that, having decided to
take on another man, Hunter had experienced no difficulty in getting
one at the same reduced rate as that which Newman was working for,
there being such numbers of men out of employment.  Hitherto the usual
rate of pay in Mugsborough had been sevenpence an hour for skilled
painters.  The reader will remember that Newman consented to accept a
job at sixpence halfpenny.  So far none of the other workmen knew that
Newman was working under price: he had told no one, not feeling sure
whether he was the only one or not.  The man whom Hunter had taken on
that morning also decided in his mind that he would keep his own
counsel concerning what pay he was to receive, until he found out what
the others were getting.

Just before half past eight Owen arrived and was immediately assailed
with questions as to what had transpired at the office.  Crass listened
with ill-concealed chagrin to Owen's account, but most of the others
were genuinely pleased.

'But what a way to speak to anybody!' observed Harlow, referring to
Hunter's manner on the previous Monday night.

'You know, I reckon if ole Misery 'ad four legs, 'e'd make a very good
pig,' said Philpot, solemnly, 'and you can't expect nothin' from a pig
but a grunt.'

During the morning, as Easton and Owen were working together in the
drawing-room, the former remarked:

'Did I tell you I had a room I wanted to let, Frank?'

'Yes, I think you did.'

'Well, I've let it to Slyme.  I think he seems a very decent sort of
chap, don't you?'

'Yes, I suppose he is,' replied Owen, hesitatingly.  'I know nothing
against him.'

'Of course, we'd rather 'ave the 'ouse to ourselves if we could afford
it, but work is so scarce lately.  I've been figuring out exactly what
my money has averaged for the last twelve months and how much a week do
you think it comes to?'

'God only knows,' said Owen.  'How much?'

'About eighteen bob.'

'So you see we had to do something,' continued Easton; 'and I reckon
we're lucky to get a respectable sort of chap like Slyme, religious and
teetotal and all that, you know.  Don't you think so?'

'Yes, I suppose you are,' said Owen, who, although he intensely
disliked Slyme, knew nothing definite against him.

They worked in silence for some time, and then Owen said:

'At the present time there are thousands of people so badly off that,
compared with them, WE are RICH.  Their sufferings are so great that
compared with them, we may be said to be living in luxury.  You know
that, don't you?'

'Yes, that's true enough, mate.  We really ought to be very thankful:
we ought to consider ourselves lucky to 'ave a inside job like this
when there's such a lot of chaps walkin' about doin' nothing.'

'Yes,' said Owen: 'we're lucky!  Although we're in a condition of
abject, miserable poverty we must consider ourselves lucky that we're
not actually starving.'

Owen was painting the door; Easton was doing the skirting.  This work
caused no noise, so they were able to converse without difficulty.

'Do you think it's right for us to tamely make up our minds to live for
the rest of our lives under such conditions as that?'

'No; certainly not,' replied Easton; 'but things are sure to get better
presently.  Trade hasn't always been as bad as it is now.  Why, you can
remember as well as I can a few years ago there was so much work that
we was putting in fourteen and sixteen hours a day.  I used to be so
done up by the end of the week that I used to stay in bed nearly all
day on Sunday.'

'But don't you think it's worth while trying to find out whether it's
possible to so arrange things that we may be able to live like
civilized human beings without being alternately worked to death or
starved?'

'I don't see how we're goin' to alter things,' answered Easton.  'At
the present time, from what I hear, work is scarce everywhere.  WE
can't MAKE work, can we?'

'Do you think, then, that the affairs of the world are something like
the wind or the weather--altogether beyond our control?  And that if
they're bad we can do nothing but just sit down and wait for them to
get better?'

'Well, I don't see 'ow we can odds it.  If the people wot's got the
money won't spend it, the likes of me and you can't make 'em, can we?'

Owen looked curiously at Easton.

'I suppose you're about twenty-six now,' he said.  'That means that you
have about another thirty years to live.  Of course, if you had proper
food and clothes and hadn't to work more than a reasonable number of
hours every day, there is no natural reason why you should not live for
another fifty or sixty years: but we'll say thirty.  Do you mean to say
that you are able to contemplate with indifference the prospect of
living for another thirty years under such conditions as those we
endure at present?'

Easton made no reply.

'If you were to commit some serious breach of the law, and were
sentenced next week to ten years' penal servitude, you'd probably think
your fate a very pitiable one: yet you appear to submit quite
cheerfully to this other sentence, which is--that you shall die a
premature death after you have done another thirty years' hard labour.'

Easton continued painting the skirting.

'When there's no work,' Owen went on, taking another dip of paint as he
spoke and starting on one of the lower panels of the door, 'when
there's no work, you will either starve or get into debt.  When--as at
present--there is a little work, you will live in a state of
semi-starvation.  When times are what you call "good", you will work
for twelve or fourteen hours a day and--if you're VERY
lucky--occasionally all night.  The extra money you then earn will go
to pay your debts so that you may be able to get credit again when
there's no work.'

Easton put some putty in a crack in the skirting.

'In consequence of living in this manner, you will die at least twenty
years sooner than is natural, or, should you have an unusually strong
constitution and live after you cease to be able to work, you will be
put into a kind of jail and treated like a criminal for the remainder
of your life.'

Having faced up the cracks, Easton resumed the painting of the skirting.

'If it were proposed to make a law that all working men and women were
to be put to death--smothered, or hung, or poisoned, or put into a
lethal chamber--as soon as they reached the age of fifty years, there
is not the slightest doubt that you would join in the uproar of protest
that would ensue.  Yet you submit tamely to have your life shortened by
slow starvation, overwork, lack of proper boots and clothing, and
though having often to turn out and go to work when you are so ill that
you ought to be in bed receiving medical care.'

Easton made no reply: he knew that all this was true, but he was not
without a large share of the false pride which prompts us to hide our
poverty and to pretend that we are much better off than we really are.
He was at that moment wearing the pair of second-hand boots that Ruth
had bought for him, but he had told Harlow--who had passed some remark
about them--that he had had them for years, wearing them only for best.
He felt very resentful as he listened to the other's talk, and Owen
perceived it, but nevertheless he continued:

'Unless the present system is altered, that is all we have to look
forward to; and yet you're one of the upholders of the present
system--you help to perpetuate it!'

''Ow do I help to perpetuate it?' demanded Easton.

'By not trying to find out how to end it--by not helping those who are
trying to bring a better state of things into existence.  Even if you
are indifferent to your own fate--as you seem to be--you have no right
to be indifferent to that of the child for whose existence in this
world you are responsible.  Every man who is not helping to bring about
a better state of affairs for the future is helping to perpetuate the
present misery, and is therefore the enemy of his own children. There
is no such thing as being neutral: we must either help or hinder.'

As Owen opened the door to paint its edge, Bert came along the passage.

'Look out!' he cried, 'Misery's comin' up the road.  'E'll be 'ere in a
minit.'

It was not often that Easton was glad to hear of the approach of
Nimrod, but on this occasion he heard Bert's message with a sigh of
relief.

'I say,' added the boy in a whisper to Owen, 'if it comes orf--I mean
if you gets the job to do this room--will you ask to 'ave me along of
you?'

'Yes, all right, sonny,' replied Owen, and Bert went off to warn the
others.

'Unaware that he had been observed, Nimrod sneaked stealthily into the
house and began softly crawling about from room to room, peeping around
corners and squinting through the cracks of doors, and looking through
keyholes.  He was almost pleased to see that everybody was very hard at
work, but on going into Newman's room Misery was not satisfied with the
progress made since his last visit.  The fact was that Newman had been
forgetting himself again this morning.  He had been taking a little
pains with the work, doing it something like properly, instead of
scamping and rushing it in the usual way.  The result was that he had
not done enough.

'You know, Newman, this kind of thing won't do!' Nimrod howled.  'You
must get over a bit more than this or you won't suit me!  If you can't
move yourself a bit quicker I shall 'ave to get someone else.  You've
been in this room since seven o'clock this morning and it's dam near
time you was out of it!'

Newman muttered something about being nearly finished now, and Hunter
ascended to the next landing--the attics, where the cheap man--Sawkins,
the labourer--was at work.  Harlow had been taken away from the attics
to go on with some of the better work, so Sawkins was now working
alone.  He had been slogging into it like a Trojan and had done quite a
lot.  He had painted not only the sashes of the window, but also a
large part of the glass, and when doing the skirting he had included
part of the floor, sometimes an inch, sometimes half an inch.

The paint was of a dark drab colour and the surface of the newly
painted doors bore a strong resemblance to corduroy cloth, and from the
bottom corners of nearly every panel there was trickling down a large
tear, as if the doors were weeping for the degenerate condition of the
decorative arts.  But these tears caused no throb of pity in the bosom
of Misery: neither did the corduroy-like surface of the work grate upon
his feelings.  He perceived them not.  He saw only that there was a Lot
of Work done and his soul was filled with rapture as he reflected that
the man who had accomplished all this was paid only fivepence an hour.
At the same time it would never do to let Sawkins know that he was
satisfied with the progress made, so he said:

'I don't want you to stand too much over this up 'ere, you know,
Sawkins.  Just mop it over anyhow, and get away from it as quick as you
can.'

'All right, sir,' replied Sawkins, wiping the sweat from his brow as
Misery began crawling downstairs again.

'Where's Harlow go to, then?' he demanded of Philpot.  ''E wasn't 'ere
just now, when I came up.'

''E's gorn downstairs, sir, out the back,' replied Joe, jerking his
thumb over his shoulder and winking at Hunter.  ''E'll be back in 'arf
a mo.'  And indeed at that moment Harlow was just coming upstairs again.

''Ere, we can't allow this kind of thing in workin' hours, you know.'
Hunter bellowed.  'There's plenty of time for that in the dinner hour!'

Nimrod now went down to the drawing-room, which Easton and Owen had
been painting.  He stood here deep in thought for some time, mentally
comparing the quantity of work done by the two men in this room with
that done by Sawkins in the attics.  Misery was not a painter himself:
he was a carpenter, and he thought but little of the difference in the
quality of the work: to him it was all about the same: just plain
painting.

'I believe it would pay us a great deal better,' he thought to himself,
'if we could get hold of a few more lightweights like Sawkins.'  And
with his mind filled with this reflection he shortly afterwards sneaked
stealthily from the house.



Chapter 14

Three Children. The Wages of Intelligence


Owen spent the greater part of the dinner hour by himself in the
drawing-room making pencil sketches in his pocket-book and taking
measurements.  In the evening after leaving off, instead of going
straight home as usual he went round to the Free Library to see if he
could find anything concerning Moorish decorative work in any of the
books there.  Although it was only a small and ill-equipped institution
he was rewarded by the discovery of illustrations of several examples
of which he made sketches.  After about an hour spent this way, as he
was proceeding homewards he observed two children--a boy and a
girl--whose appearance seemed familiar.  They were standing at the
window of a sweetstuff shop examining the wares exposed therein.  As
Owen came up the children turned round and they recognized each other
simultaneously.  They were Charley and Elsie Linden.  Owen spoke to
them as he drew near and the boy appealed to him for his opinion
concerning a dispute they had been having.

'I say, mister.  Which do you think is the best: a fardensworth of
everlasting stickjaw torfee, or a prize packet?'

'I'd rather have a prize packet,' replied Owen, unhesitatingly.

'There!  I told you so!' cried Elsie, triumphantly.

'Well, I don't care.  I'd sooner 'ave the torfee,' said Charley,
doggedly.

'Why, can't you agree which of the two to buy?'

'Oh no, it's not that,' replied Elsie.  'We was only just SUPPOSING
what we'd buy if we 'ad a fardin; but we're not really goin' to buy
nothing, because we ain't got no money.'

'Oh, I see,' said Owen.  'But I think _I_ have some money,' and putting
his hand into his pocket he produced two halfpennies and gave one to
each of the children, who immediately went in to buy the toffee and the
prize packet, and when they came out he walked along with them, as they
were going in the same direction as he was: indeed, they would have to
pass by his house.

'Has your grandfather got anything to do yet?' he inquired as they went
along.

'No.  'E's still walkin' about, mister,' replied Charley.

When they reached Owen's door he invited them to come up to see the
kitten, which they had been inquiring about on the way.  Frankie was
delighted with these two visitors, and whilst they were eating some
home-made cakes that Nora gave them, he entertained them by displaying
the contents of his toy box, and the antics of the kitten, which was
the best toy of all, for it invented new games all the time: acrobatic
performances on the rails of chairs; curtain climbing; running slides
up and down the oilcloth; hiding and peeping round corners and under
the sofa.  The kitten cut so many comical capers, and in a little while
the children began to create such an uproar, that Nora had to interfere
lest the people in the flat underneath should be annoyed.

However, Elsie and Charley were not able to stay very long, because
their mother would be anxious about them, but they promised to come
again some other day to play with Frankie.

'I'm going to 'ave a prize next Sunday at our Sunday School,' said
Elsie as they were leaving.

'What are you going to get it for?' asked Nora.

''Cause I learned my text properly.  I had to learn the whole of the
first chapter of Matthew by heart and I never made one single mistake!
So teacher said she'd give me a nice book next Sunday.'

'I 'ad one too, the other week, about six months ago, didn't I, Elsie?'
said Charley.

'Yes,' replied Elsie and added: 'Do they give prizes at your Sunday
School, Frankie?'

'I don't go to Sunday School.'

'Ain't you never been?' said Charley in a tone of surprise.

'No,' replied Frankie.  'Dad says I have quite enough of school all the
week.'

'You ought to come to ours, man!' urged Charley.  'It's not like being
in school at all!  And we 'as a treat in the summer, and prizes and
sometimes a magic lantern 'tainment.  It ain't 'arf all right, I can
tell you.'

Frankie looked inquiringly at his mother.

'Might I go, Mum?'

'Yes, if you like, dear.'

'But I don't know the way.'

'Oh, it's not far from 'ere,' cried Charley.  'We 'as to pass by your
'ouse when we're goin', so I'll call for you on Sunday if you like.'

'It's only just round in Duke Street; you know, the "Shining Light
Chapel",' said Elsie.  'It commences at three o'clock.'

'All right,' said Nora.  'I'll have Frankie ready at a quarter to
three.  But now you must run home as fast as you can.  Did you like
those cakes?'

'Yes, thank you very much,' answered Elsie.

'Not 'arf!' said Charley.

'Does your mother make cakes for you sometimes?'

'She used to, but she's too busy now, making blouses and one thing and
another,' Elsie answered.

'I suppose she hasn't much time for cooking,' said Nora, 'so I've
wrapped up some more of those cakes in this parcel for you to take home
for tomorrow.  I think you can manage to carry it all right, can't you,
Charley?'

'I think I'd better carry it myself,' said Elsie.  'Charley's SO
careless, he's sure to lose some of them.'

'I ain't no more careless than you are,' cried Charley, indignantly.
'What about the time you dropped the quarter of butter you was sent for
in the mud?'

'That wasn't carelessness: that was an accident, and it wasn't butter
at all: it was margarine, so there!'

Eventually it was arranged that they were to carry the parcel in turns,
Elsie to have first innings.  Frankie went downstairs to the front door
with them to see them off, and as they went down the street he shouted
after them:

'Mind you remember, next Sunday!'

'All right,' Charley shouted back.  'We shan't forget.'



On Thursday Owen stayed at home until after breakfast to finish the
designs which he had promised to have ready that morning.

When he took them to the office at nine o'clock, the hour at which he
had arranged to meet Rushton, the latter had not yet arrived, and he
did not put in an appearance until half an hour later.  Like the
majority of people who do brain work, he needed a great deal more rest
than those who do only mere physical labour.

'Oh, you've brought them sketches, I suppose,' he remarked in a surly
tone as he came in.  'You know, there was no need for you to wait: you
could 'ave left 'em 'ere and gone on to your job.'

He sat down at his desk and looked carelessly at the drawing that Owen
handed to him.  It was on a sheet of paper about twenty-four by
eighteen inches.  The design was drawn with pencil and one half of it
was .

'That's for the ceiling,' said Owen.  'I hadn't time to colour all of
it.'

With an affectation of indifference, Rushton laid the drawing down and
took the other which Owen handed to him.

'This is for the large wall.  The same design would be adapted for the
other walls; and this one shows the door and the panels under the
window.'

Rushton expressed no opinion about the merits of the drawings.  He
examined them carelessly one after the other, and then, laying them
down, he inquired:

'How long would it take you to do this work--if we get the job?'

'About three weeks: say 150 hours.  That is--the decorative work only.
Of course, the walls and ceiling would have to be painted first: they
will need three coats of white.'

Rushton scribbled a note on a piece of paper.

'Well,' he said, after a pause, 'you can leave these 'ere and I'll see
Mr Sweater about it and tell 'im what it will cost, and if he decides
to have it done I'll let you know.'

He put the drawings aside with the air of a man who has other matters
to attend to, and began to open one of the several letters that were on
his desk.  He meant this as an intimation that the audience was at an
end and that he desired the 'hand' to retire from the presence. Owen
understood this, but he did not retire, because it was necessary to
mention one or two things which Rushton would have to allow for when
preparing the estimate.

'Of course I should want some help,' he said.  'I should need a man
occasionally, and the boy most of the time.  Then there's the gold
leaf--say, fifteen books.'

'Don't you think it would be possible to use gold paint?'

'I'm afraid not.'

'Is there anything else?' inquired Rushton as he finished writing down
these items.

'I think that's all, except a few sheets of cartridge paper for
stencils and working drawings.  The quantity of paint necessary for the
decorative work will be very small.'

As soon as Owen was gone, Rushton took up the designs and examined them
attentively.

'These are all right,' he muttered.  'Good enough for anywhere.  If he
can paint anything like as well as this on the walls and ceiling of the
room, it will stand all the looking at that anyone in this town is
likely to give it.'

'Let's see,' he continued.  'He said three weeks, but he's so anxious
to do the job that he's most likely under-estimated the time; I'd
better allow four weeks: that means about 200 hours: 200 hours at
eight-pence: how much is that?  And say he has a painter to help him
half the time.  100 hours at sixpence-ha'penny.'

He consulted a ready reckoner that was on the desk.

'Time, L9.7.6.  Materials: fifteen books of gold, say a pound.  Then
there's the cartridge paper and the colours--say another pound, at the
outside.  Boy's time?  Well, he gets no wages as yet, so we needn't
mention that at all.  Then there's the preparing of the room. Three
coats of white paint.  I wish Hunter was here to give me an idea what
it will cost.'

As if in answer to his wish, Nimrod entered the office at that moment,
and in reply to Rushton's query said that to give the walls and ceiling
three coats of paint would cost about three pounds five for time and
material.  Between them the two brain workers figured that fifteen
pounds would cover the entire cost of the work--painting and decorating.

'Well, I reckon we can charge Sweater forty-five pounds for it,' said
Rushton.  'It isn't like an ordinary job, you know.  If he gets a
London firm to do it, it'll cost him double that, if not more.'

Having arrived at this decision, Rushton rung up Sweater's Emporium on
the telephone, and, finding that Mr Sweater was there, he rolled up the
designs and set out for that gentleman's office.

The men work with their hands, and the masters work with their brains.
What a dreadful calamity it would be for the world and for mankind if
all these brain workers were to go on strike.



Chapter 15

The Undeserving Persons and the Upper and Nether Millstones


Hunter had taken on three more painters that morning.  Bundy and two
labourers had commenced the work of putting in the new drains; the
carpenters were back again doing some extra work, and there was also a
plumber working on the house; so there was quite a little crowd in the
kitchen at dinner-time.  Crass had been waiting for a suitable
opportunity to produce the newspaper cutting which it will be
remembered he showed to Easton on Monday morning, but he had waited in
vain, for there had been scarcely any 'political' talk at meal-times
all the week, and it was now Thursday.  As far as Owen was concerned,
his thoughts were so occupied with the designs for the drawing-room
that he had no time for anything else, and most of the others were only
too willing to avoid a subject which frequently led to unpleasantness.
As a rule Crass himself had no liking for such discussion, but he was
so confident of being able to 'flatten out' Owen with the cutting from
the Obscurer that he had several times tried to lead the conversation
into the desired channel, but so far without success.

During dinner--as they called it--various subjects were discussed.
Harlow mentioned that he had found traces of bugs in one of the
bedrooms upstairs and this called forth a number of anecdotes of those
vermin and of houses infested by them.  Philpot remembered working in a
house over at Windley; the people who lived in it were very dirty and
had very little furniture; no bedsteads, the beds consisting of
dilapidated mattresses and rags on the floor.  He declared that these
ragged mattresses used to wander about the rooms by themselves.  The
house was so full of fleas that if one placed a sheet of newspaper on
the floor one could hear and see them jumping on it.  In fact, directly
one went into that house one was covered from head to foot with fleas!
During the few days he worked at that place, he lost several pounds in
weight, and of evenings as he walked homewards the children and people
in the streets, observing his ravaged countenance, thought he was
suffering from some disease and used to get out of his way when they
saw him coming.

There were several other of these narratives, four or five men talking
at the top of their voices at the same time, each one telling a
different story.  At first each story-teller addressed himself to the
company generally, but after a while, finding it impossible to make
himself heard, he would select some particular individual who seemed
disposed to listen and tell him the story.  It sometimes happened that
in the middle of the tale the man to whom it was being told would
remember a somewhat similar adventure of his own, which he would
immediately proceed to relate without waiting for the other to finish,
and each of them was generally so interested in the gruesome details of
his own story that he was unconscious of the fact that the other was
telling one at all.  In a contest of this kind the victory usually went
to the man with the loudest voice, but sometimes a man who had a weak
voice, scored by repeating the same tale several times until someone
heard it.

Barrington, who seldom spoke and was an ideal listener, was
appropriated by several men in succession, who each told him a
different yarn.  There was one man sitting on an up-ended pail in the
far corner of the room and it was evident from the movements of his
lips that he also was relating a story, although nobody knew what it
was about or heard a single word of it, for no one took the slightest
notice of him...

When the uproar had subsided Harlow remembered the case of a family
whose house got into such a condition that the landlord had given them
notice and the father had committed suicide because the painters had
come to turn 'em out of house and home.  There were a man, his wife and
daughter--a girl about seventeen--living in the house, and all three of
'em used to drink like hell.  As for the woman, she COULD shift it and
no mistake!  Several times a day she used to send the girl with a jug
to the pub at the corner.  When the old man was out, one could have
anything one liked to ask for from either of 'em for half a pint of
beer, but for his part, said Harlow, he could never fancy it.  They
were both too ugly.

The finale of this tale was received with a burst of incredulous
laughter by those who heard it.

'Do you 'ear what Harlow says, Bob?' Easton shouted to Crass.

'No.  What was it?'

''E ses 'e once 'ad a chance to 'ave something but 'e wouldn't take it
on because it was too ugly!'

'If it 'ad bin me, I should 'ave shut me bl--y eyes,' cried Sawkins. 'I
wouldn't pass it for a trifle like that.'

'No,' said Crass amid laughter, 'and you can bet your life 'e didn't
lose it neither, although 'e tries to make 'imself out to be so
innocent.'

'I always though old Harlow was a bl--y liar,' remarked Bundy, 'but now
we knows 'e is.'

Although everyone pretended to disbelieve him, Harlow stuck to his
version of the story.

'It's not their face you want, you know,' added Bundy as he helped
himself to some more tea.

'I know it wasn't my old woman's face that I was after last night,'
observed Crass; and then he proceeded amid roars of laughter to give a
minutely detailed account of what had taken place between himself and
his wife after they had retired for the night.

This story reminded the man on the pail of a very strange dream he had
had a few weeks previously: 'I dreamt I was walkin' along the top of a
'igh cliff or some sich place, and all of a sudden the ground give way
under me feet and I began to slip down and down and to save meself from
going over I made a grab at a tuft of grass as was growin' just within
reach of me 'and.  And then I thought that some feller was 'ittin me on
the 'ead with a bl--y great stick, and tryin' to make me let go of the
tuft of grass.  And then I woke up to find my old woman shouting out
and punchin' me with 'er fists.  She said I was pullin' 'er 'air!'

While the room was in an uproar with the merriment induced by these
stories, Crass rose from his seat and crossed over to where his
overcoat was hanging on a nail in the wall, and took from the pocket a
piece of card about eight inches by about four inches.  One side of it
was covered with printing, and as he returned to his seat Crass called
upon the others to listen while he read it aloud.  He said it was one
of the best things he had ever seen: it had been given to him by a
bloke in the Cricketers the other night.

Crass was not a very good reader, but he was able to read this all
right because he had read it so often that he almost knew it by heart.
It was entitled 'The Art of Flatulence', and it consisted of a number
of rules and definitions.  Shouts of laughter greeted the reading of
each paragraph, and when he had ended, the piece of dirty card was
handed round for the benefit of those who wished to read it for
themselves.  Several of the men, however, when it was offered to them,
refused to take it, and with evident disgust suggested that it should
be put into the fire.  This view did not commend itself to Crass, who,
after the others had finished with it, put it back in the pocket of his
coat.

Meanwhile, Bundy stood up to help himself to some more tea.  The cup he
was drinking from had a large piece broken out of one side and did not
hold much, so he usually had to have three or four helpings.

'Anyone else want any' he asked.

Several cups and jars were passed to him.  These vessels had been
standing on the floor, and the floor was very dirty and covered with
dust, so before dipping them into the pail, Bundy--who had been working
at the drains all morning--wiped the bottoms of the jars upon his
trousers, on the same place where he was in the habit of wiping his
hands when he happened to get some dirt on them.  He filled the jars so
full that as he held them by the rims and passed them to their owners
part of the contents slopped over and trickled through his fingers.  By
the time he had finished the floor was covered with little pools of tea.

'They say that Gord made everything for some useful purpose,' remarked
Harlow, reverting to the original subject, 'but I should like to know
what the hell's the use of sich things as bugs and fleas and the like.'

'To teach people to keep theirselves clean, of course,' said Slyme.

'That's a funny subject, ain't it?' continued Harlow, ignoring Slyme's
answer.  'They say as all diseases is caused by little insects.  If
Gord 'adn't made no cancer germs or consumption microbes there wouldn't
be no cancer or consumption.'

'That's one of the proofs that there ISN'T an individual God,' said
Owen.  'If we were to believe that the universe and everything that
lives was deliberately designed and created by God, then we must also
believe that He made his disease germs you are speaking of for the
purpose of torturing His other creatures.'

'You can't tell me a bloody yarn like that,' interposed Crass, roughly.
'There's a Ruler over us, mate, and so you're likely to find out.'

'If Gord didn't create the world, 'ow did it come 'ere?' demanded Slyme.

'I know no more about that than you do,' replied Owen.  'That is--I
know nothing.  The only difference between us is that you THINK you
know.  You think you know that God made the universe; how long it took
Him to do it; why He made it; how long it's been in existence and how
it will finally pass away.  You also imagine you know that we shall
live after we're dead; where we shall go, and the kind of existence we
shall have.  In fact, in the excess of your "humility", you think you
know all about it.  But really you know no more of these things than
any other human being does; that is, you know NOTHING.'

'That's only YOUR opinion,' said Slyme.

'If we care to take the trouble to learn,' Owen went on, 'we can know a
little of how the universe has grown and changed; but of the beginning
we know nothing.'

'That's just my opinion, matey,' observed Philpot.  'It's just a bloody
mystery, and that's all about it.'

'I don't pretend to 'ave no 'ead knowledge,' said Slyme, 'but 'ead
knowledge won't save a man's soul: it's 'EART knowledge as does that. I
knows in my 'eart as my sins is all hunder the Blood, and it's knowin'
that, wot's given 'appiness and the peace which passes all
understanding to me ever since I've been a Christian.'

'Glory, glory, hallelujah!' shouted Bundy, and nearly everyone laughed.

'"Christian" is right,' sneered Owen.  'You've got some title to call
yourself a Christian, haven't you?  As for the happiness that passes
all understanding, it certainly passes MY understanding how you can be
happy when you believe that millions of people are being tortured in
Hell; and it also passes my understanding why you are not ashamed of
yourself for being happy under such circumstances.'

'Ah, well, you'll find it all out when you come to die, mate,' replied
Slyme in a threatening tone.  'You'll think and talk different then!'

'That's just wot gets over ME,' observed Harlow.  'It don't  seem right
that after living in misery and poverty all our bloody lives, workin'
and slavin' all the hours that Gord A'mighty sends, that we're to be
bloody well set fire and burned in 'ell for all eternity!  It don't
seem feasible to me, you know.'

'It's my belief,' said Philpot, profoundly, 'that when you're dead,
you're done for.  That's the end of you.'

'That's what _I_ say,' remarked Easton.  'As for all this religious
business, it's just a money-making dodge.  It's the parson's trade,
just the same as painting is ours, only there's no work attached to it
and the pay's a bloody sight better than ours is.'

'It's their livin', and a bloody good livin' too, if you ask me,' said
Bundy.

'Yes,' said Harlow; 'they lives on the fat o' the land, and wears the
best of everything, and they does nothing for it but talk a lot of
twaddle two or three times a week.  The rest of the time they spend
cadgin' money orf silly old women who thinks it's a sorter fire
insurance.'

'It's an old sayin' and a true one,' chimed in the man on the upturned
pail.  'Parsons and publicans is the worst enemies the workin' man ever
'ad.  There may be SOME good 'uns, but they're few and far between.'

'If I could only get a job like the Harchbishop of Canterbury,' said
Philpot, solemnly, 'I'd leave this firm.'

'So would I,' said Harlow, 'if I was the Harchbishop of Canterbury, I'd
take my pot and brushes down the office and shy 'em through the bloody
winder and tell ole Misery to go to 'ell.'

'Religion is a thing that don't trouble ME much,' remarked Newman; 'and
as for what happens to you after death, it's a thing I believe in
leavin' till you comes to it--there's no sense in meetin' trouble
'arfway.  All the things they tells us may be true or they may not, but
it takes me all my time to look after THIS world.  I don't believe I've
been to church more than arf a dozen times since I've been
married--that's over fifteen years ago now--and then it's been when the
kids 'ave been christened.  The old woman goes sometimes and of course
the young 'uns goes; you've got to tell 'em something or other, and
they might as well learn what they teaches at the Sunday School as
anything else.'

A general murmur of approval greeted this.  It seemed to be the almost
unanimous opinion, that, whether it were true or not, 'religion' was a
nice thing to teach children.

'I've not been even once since I was married,' said Harlow, 'and I
sometimes wish to Christ I 'adn't gorn then.'

'I don't see as it matters a dam wot a man believes,' said Philpot, 'as
long as you don't do no 'arm to nobody.  If you see a poor b--r wot's
down on 'is luck, give 'im a 'elpin' 'and.  Even if you ain't got no
money you can say a kind word.  If a man does 'is work and looks arter
'is 'ome and 'is young 'uns, and does a good turn to a fellow creature
when 'e can, I reckon 'e stands as much chance of getting into
'eaven--if there IS sich a place--as some of there 'ere Bible-busters,
whether 'e ever goes to church or chapel or not.'

These sentiments were echoed by everyone with the solitary exception of
Slyme, who said that Philpot would find out his mistake after he was
dead, when he would have to stand before the Great White Throne for
judgement!

'And at the Last Day, when yer sees the moon turned inter Blood, you'll
be cryin' hout for the mountings and the rocks to fall on yer and 'ide
yer from the wrath of the Lamb!'

The others laughed derisively.

'I'm a Bush Baptist meself,' remarked the man on the upturned pail.
This individual, Dick Wantley by name, was of what is usually termed a
'rugged' cast of countenance.  He reminded one strongly of an ancient
gargoyle, or a dragon.

Most of the hands had by now lit their pipes, but there were a few who
preferred chewing their tobacco.  As they smoked or chewed they
expectorated upon the floor or into the fire.  Wantley was one of those
who preferred chewing and he had been spitting upon the floor to such
an extent that he was by this time partly surrounded by a kind of
semicircular moat of dark brown spittle.

'I'm a Bush Baptist!' he shouted across the moat, 'and you all knows
wot that is.'

This confession of faith caused a fresh outburst of hilarity, because
of course everyone knew what a Bush Baptist was.

'If 'evven's goin' to be full of sich b--r's as Hunter,' observed
Eaton, 'I think I'd rather go to the other place.'

'If ever ole Misery DOES get into 'eaven,' said Philpot, ''e won't stop
there very long.  I reckon 'e'll be chucked out of it before 'e's been
there a week, because 'e's sure to start pinchin' the jewels out of the
other saints' crowns.'

'Well, if they won't 'ave 'im in 'eaven, I'm sure I don't know wot's to
become of 'im,' said Harlow with pretended concern, 'because I don't
believe 'e'd be allowed into 'ell, now.'

'Why not?' demanded Bundy.  'I should think it's just the bloody place
for sich b--r's as 'im.'

'So it used to be at one time o' day, but they've changed all that now.
They've 'ad a revolution down there: deposed the Devil, elected a
parson as President, and started puttin' the fire out.'

'From what I hears of it,' continued Harlow when the laughter had
ceased, ''ell is a bloody fine place to live in just now.  There's
underground railways and 'lectric trams, and at the corner of nearly
every street there's a sort of pub where you can buy ice-cream, lemon
squash, four ale, and American cold drinks; and you're allowed to sit
in a refrigerator for two hours for a tanner.'

Although they laughed and made fun of these things the reader must not
think that they really doubted the truth of the Christian religion,
because--although they had all been brought up by 'Christian' parents
and had been 'educated' in 'Christian' schools--none of them knew
enough about Christianity to either really believe it or disbelieve it.
The imposters who obtain a comfortable living by pretending to be the
ministers and disciples of the Workman of Nazareth are too cunning to
encourage their dupes to acquire anything approaching an intelligent
understanding of the subject.  They do not want people to know or
understand anything: they want them to have Faith--to believe without
knowledge, understanding, or evidence.  For years Harlow and his
mates--when children--had been 'taught' 'Christianity' in day school,
Sunday School and in church or chapel, and now they knew practically
nothing about it!  But they were 'Christians' all the same.  They
believed that the Bible was the word of God, but they didn't know where
it came from, how long it had been in existence, who wrote it, who
translated it or how many different versions there were. Most of them
were almost totally unacquainted with the contents of the book itself.
But all the same, they believed it--after a fashion.

'But puttin' all jokes aside,' said Philpot, 'I can't believe there's
sich a place as 'ell.  There may be some kind of punishment, but I
don't believe it's a real fire.'

'Nor nobody else, what's got any sense,' replied Harlow, contemptuously.

'I believe as THIS world is 'ell,' said Crass, looking around with a
philosophic expression.  This opinion was echoed by most of the others,
although Slyme remained silent and Owen laughed.

'Wot the bloody 'ell are YOU laughin' at?' Crass demanded in an
indignant tone.

'I was laughing because you said you think this world is hell.'

'Well, I don't see nothing to laugh at in that,' said Crass.

'So it IS a 'ell,' said Easton.  'There can't be anywheres much worse
than this.'

''Ear, 'ear,' said the man behind the moat.

'What I was laughing at is this,' said Owen.  'The present system of
managing the affairs of the world is so bad and has produced such
dreadful results that you are of the opinion that the earth is a hell:
and yet you are a Conservative!  You wish to preserve the present
system--the system which has made the world into a hell!'

'I thought we shouldn't get through the dinner hour without politics if
Owen was 'ere,' growled Bundy.  'Bloody sickenin' I call it.'

'Don't be 'ard on 'im,' said Philpot.  ''E's been very quiet for the
last few days.'

'We'll 'ave to go through it today, though,' remarked Harlow
despairingly.  'I can see it comin'.'

'I'M not goin' through it,' said Bundy, 'I'm orf!'  And he accordingly
drank the remainder of his tea, closed his empty dinner basket and,
having placed it on the mantelshelf, made for the door.

'I'll leave you to it,' he said as he went out.  The others laughed.

Crass, remembering the cutting from the Obscurer that he had in his
pocket, was secretly very pleased at the turn the conversation was
taking.  He turned roughly on Owen:

'The other day, when we was talkin' about the cause of poverty, you
contradicted everybody.  Everyone else was wrong!  But you yourself
couldn't tell us what's the cause of poverty, could you?'

'I think I could.'

'Oh, of course, you think you know,' sneered Crass, 'and of course you
think your opinion's right and everybody else's is wrong.'

'Yes,' replied Owen.

Several men expressed their abhorrence of this intolerant attitude of
Owen's, but the latter rejoined:

'Of course I think that my opinions are right and that everyone who
differs from me is wrong.  If I didn't think their opinions were wrong
I wouldn't differ from them.  If I didn't think my own opinions right I
wouldn't hold them.'

'But there's no need to keep on arguin' about it day after day,' said
Crass.  'You've got your opinion and I've got mine.  Let everyone enjoy
his own opinion, I say.'

A murmur of approbation from the crowd greeted these sentiments; but
Owen rejoined:

'But we can't both be right; if your opinions are right and mine are
not, how am I to find out the truth if we never talk about them?'

'Well, wot do you reckon is the cause of poverty, then?' demanded
Easton.

'The present system--competition--capitalism.'

'It's all very well to talk like that,' snarled Crass, to whom this
statement conveyed no meaning whatever.  'But 'ow do you make it out?'

'Well, I put it like that for the sake of shortness,' replied Owen.
'Suppose some people were living in a house--'

'More supposin'!' sneered Crass.

'And suppose they were always ill, and suppose that the house was badly
built, the walls so constructed that they drew and retained moisture,
the roof broken and leaky, the drains defective, the doors and windows
ill-fitting and the rooms badly shaped and draughty.  If you were asked
to name, in a word, the cause of the ill-health of the people who lived
there you would say--the house.  All the tinkering in the world would
not make that house fit to live in; the only thing to do with it would
be to pull it down and build another.  Well, we're all living in a
house called the Money System; and as a result most of us are suffering
from a disease called poverty.  There's so much the matter with the
present system that it's no good tinkering at it. Everything about it
is wrong and there's nothing about it that's right.  There's only one
thing to be done with it and that is to smash it up and have a
different system altogether.  We must get out of it.'

'It seems to me that that's just what you're trying to do,' remanded
Harlow, sarcastically.  'You seem to be tryin' to get out of answering
the question what Easton asked you.'

'Yes!' cried Crass, fiercely.  'Why don't you answer the bloody
question?  Wot's the cause of poverty?'

'What the 'ell's the matter with the present system?' demanded Sawkins.

'Ow's it goin' to be altered?' said Newman.

'Wot the bloody 'ell sort of a system do YOU think we ought to 'ave?'
shouted the man behind the moat.

'It can't never be altered,' said Philpot.  'Human nature's human
nature and you can't get away from it.'

'Never mind about human nature,' shouted Crass.  'Stick to the point.
Wot's the cause of poverty?'

'Oh, b--r the cause of poverty!' said one of the new hands.  'I've 'ad
enough of this bloody row.'  And he stood up and prepared to go out of
the room.

This individual had two patches on the seat of his trousers and the
bottoms of the legs of that garment were frayed and ragged.  He had
been out of work for about six weeks previous to having been taken on
by Rushton & Co.  During most of that time he and his family had been
existing in a condition of semi-starvation on the earnings of his wife
as a charwoman and on the scraps of food she brought home from the
houses where she worked.  But all the same, the question of what is the
cause of poverty had no interest for him.

'There are many causes,' answered Owen, 'but they are all part of and
inseparable from the system.  In order to do away with poverty we must
destroy the causes: to do away with the causes we must destroy the
whole system.'

'What are the causes, then?'

'Well, money, for one thing.'

This extraordinary assertion was greeted with a roar of merriment, in
the midst of which Philpot was heard to say that to listen to Owen was
as good as going to a circus.  Money was the cause of poverty!

'I always thought it was the want of it!' said the man with the patches
on the seat of his trousers as he passed out of the door.

'Other things,' continued Owen, 'are private ownership of land, private
ownership of railways, tramways, gasworks, waterworks, private
ownership of factories, and the other means of producing the
necessaries and comforts of life.  Competition in business--'

'But 'ow do you make it out?' demanded Crass, impatiently.

Owen hesitated.  To his mind the thing appeared very clear and simple.
The causes of poverty were so glaringly evident that he marvelled that
any rational being should fail to perceive them; but at the same time
he found it very difficult to define them himself.  He could not think
of words that would convey his thoughts clearly to these others who
seemed so hostile and unwilling to understand, and who appeared to have
made up their minds to oppose and reject whatever he said.  They did
not know what were the causes of poverty and apparently they did not
WANT to know.

'Well, I'll try to show you one of the causes,' he said nervously at
last.

He picked up a piece of charred wood that had fallen from the fire and
knelt down and began to draw upon the floor.  Most of the others
regarded him, with looks in which an indulgent, contemptuous kind of
interest mingled with an air of superiority and patronage.  There was
no doubt, they thought, that Owen was a clever sort of chap: his work
proved that: but he was certainly a little bit mad.

By this time Owen had drawn a circle about two feet in diameter. Inside
he had drawn two squares, one much larger than the other. These two
squares he filled in solid black with the charcoal.

'Wot's it all about?' asked Crass with a sneer.

'Why, can't you see?' said Philpot with a wink.  ''E's goin' to do some
conjurin'!  In a minit 'e'll make something pass out o' one o' them
squares into the other and no one won't see 'ow it's done.'

When he had finished drawing, Owen remained for a few minutes awkwardly
silent, oppressed by the anticipation of ridicule and a sense of his
inability to put his thoughts into plain language.  He began to wish
that he had not undertaken this task.  At last, with an effort, he
began to speak in a halting, nervous way:

                             .......
                          ...       ...
                        ..             ..
                       .       ###       .
                      .        ###        .
                     .                     .
                     .   ###############   .
                    .    ###############    .
                    .    ###############    .
                    .    ###############    .
                     .   ###############   .
                     .   ###############   .
                      .                   .
                       ..               ..
                         ...         ...
                            .........

'This circle--or rather the space inside the circle--is supposed to
represent England.'

'Well, I never knowed it was round before,' jeered Crass.  'I've heard
as the WORLD is round--'

'I never said it was the shape--I said it was supposed to REPRESENT
England.'


'Oh, I see.  I thought we'd very soon begin supposin'.'

'The two black squares,' continued Owen, 'represent the people who live
in the country.  The small square represents a few thousand people.
The large square stands for the remainder--about forty millions--that
is, the majority.'

'We ain't sich bloody fools as to think that the largest number is the
minority,' interrupted Crass.

'The greater number of the people represented by the large black square
work for their living: and in return for their labour they receive
money: some more, some less than others.'

'You don't think they'd be sich bloody fools as to work for nothing, do
you?' said Newman.

'I suppose you think they ought all to get the same wages!' cried
Harlow.  'Do you think it's right that a scavenger should get as much
as a painter?'

'I'm not speaking about that at all,' replied Owen.  'I'm trying to
show you what I think is one of the causes of poverty.'

'Shut up, can't you, Harlow,' remonstrated Philpot, who began to feel
interested.  'We can't all talk at once.'

'I know we can't,' replied Harlow in an aggrieved tone: 'but 'e takes
sich a 'ell of a time to say wot 'e's got to say.  Nobody else can't
get a word in edgeways.'

'In order that these people may live,' continued Owen, pointing to the
large black square, 'it is first necessary that they shall have a PLACE
to live in--'

'Well!  I should never a thought it!' exclaimed the man on the pail,
pretending to be much impressed.  The others laughed, and two or three
of them went out of the room, contemptuously remarking to each other in
an audible undertone as they went:

'Bloody rot!'

'Wonder wot the bloody 'ell 'e thinks 'e is?  A sort of schoolmaster?'

Owen's nervousness increased as he continued:

'Now, they can't live in the air or in the sea.  These people are land
animals, therefore they must live on the land.'

'Wot do yer mean by animals?' demanded Slyme.

'A human bean ain't a animal!' said Crass indignantly.

'Yes, we are!' cried Harlow.  'Go into any chemist's shop you like and
ask the bloke, and 'e'll tell you--'

'Oh, blow that!' interrupted Philpot.  'Let's 'ear wot Owen's sayin'.'

'They must live on the land: and that's the beginning of the trouble;
because--under the present system--the majority of the people have
really no right to be in the country at all!  Under the present system
the country belongs to a few--those who are here represented by this
small black square.  If it would pay them to do so, and if they felt so
disposed, these few people have a perfect right--under the present
system--to order everyone else to clear out!

'But they don't do that, they allow the majority to remain in the land
on one condition--that is, they must pay rent to the few for the
privilege of being permitted to live in the land of their birth.  The
amount of rent demanded by those who own this country is so large that,
in order to pay it, the greater number of the majority have often to
deprive themselves and their children, not only of the comforts, but
even the necessaries of life.  In the case of the working classes the
rent absorbs at the lowest possible estimate, about one-third of their
total earnings, for it must be remembered that the rent is an expense
that goes on all the time, whether they are employed or not.  If they
get into arrears when out of work, they have to pay double when they
get employment again.

'The majority work hard and live in poverty in order that the minority
may live in luxury without working at all, and as the majority are
mostly fools, they not only agree to pass their lives in incessant
slavery and want, in order to pay this rent to those who own the
country, but they say it is quite right that they should have to do so,
and are very grateful to the little minority for allowing them to
remain in the country at all.'

Owen paused, and immediately there arose a great clamour from his
listeners.

'So it IS right, ain't it?' shouted Crass.  'If you 'ad a 'ouse and let
it to someone, you'd want your rent, wouldn't yer?'

'I suppose,' said Slyme with resentment, for he had some shares in a
local building society, 'after a man's been careful, and scraping and
saving and going without things he ought to 'ave 'ad all 'is life, and
managed to buy a few 'ouses to support 'im in 'is old age--they ought
all to be took away from 'im?  Some people,' he added, 'ain't got
common honesty.'

Nearly everyone had something to say in reprobation of the views
suggested by Owen.  Harlow, in a brief but powerful speech, bristling
with numerous sanguinary references to the bottomless pit, protested
against any interference with the sacred rights of property.  Easton
listened with a puzzled expression, and Philpot's goggle eyes rolled
horribly as he glared silently at the circle and the two squares.

'By far the greatest part of the land,' said Owen when the row had
ceased, 'is held by people who have absolutely no moral right to it.
Possession of much of it was obtained by means of murder and theft
perpetrated by the ancestors of the present holders.  In other cases,
when some king or prince wanted to get rid of a mistress of whom he had
grown weary, he presented a tract of our country to some 'nobleman' on
condition that he would marry the female.  Vast estates were also
bestowed upon the remote ancestors of the present holders in return for
real or alleged services.  Listen to this,' he continued as he took a
small newspaper cutting from his pocket-book.

Crass looked at the piece of paper dolefully.  It reminded him of the
one he had in his own pocket, which he was beginning to fear that he
would not have an opportunity of producing today after all.

'Ballcartridge Rent Day.

'The hundredth anniversary of the Battle of Ballcartridge occurred
yesterday and in accordance with custom the Duke of Ballcartridge
handed to the authorities the little flag which he annually presents to
the State in virtue of his tenure of the vast tract of this country
which was presented to one of his ancestors--the first Duke--in
addition to his salary, for his services at the battle of Ballcartridge.

'The flag--which is the only rent the Duke has to pay for the great
estate which brings him in several hundreds of thousands of pounds per
annum--is a small tricoloured one with a staff surmounted by an eagle.

'The Duke of Blankmind also presents the State with a little 
silk flag every year in return for being allowed to retain possession
of that part of England which was presented--in addition to his
salary--to one of His Grace's very remote ancestors, for his services
at the battle of Commissariat--in the Netherlands.

'The Duke of Southward is another instance,' continued Owen.  'He
"owns" miles of the country we speak of as "ours".  Much of his part
consists of confiscated monastery lands which were stolen from the
owners by King Henry VIII and presented to the ancestors of the present
Duke.

'Whether it was right or wrong that these parts of our country should
ever have been given to those people--the question whether those
ancestor persons were really deserving cases or not--is a thing we need
not trouble ourselves about now.  But the present holders are certainly
not deserving people.  They do not even take the trouble to pretend
they are.  They have done nothing and they do nothing to justify their
possession of these "estates" as they call them.  And in my opinion no
man who is in his right mind can really think it's just that these
people should be allowed to prey upon their fellow men as they are
doing now.  Or that it is right that their children should be allowed
to continue to prey upon our children for ever!  The thousands of
people on those estates work and live in poverty in order that these
three men and their families may enjoy leisure and luxury.  Just think
of the absurdity of it!' continued Owen, pointing to the drawings.
'All those people allowing themselves to be overworked and bullied and
starved and robbed by this little crowd here!'

Observing signs of a renewal of the storm of protests, Owen hurriedly
concluded:

'Whether it's right or wrong, you can't deny that the fact that this
small minority possesses nearly all the land of the country is one of
the principal causes of the poverty of the majority.'

'Well, that seems true enough,' said Easton, slowly.  'The rent's the
biggest item a workin' man's got to pay.  When you're out of work and
you can't afford other things, you goes without 'em, but the rent 'as
to be paid whether you're workin' or not.'

'Yes, that's true enough,' said Harlow impatiently; 'but you gets value for
yer money: you can't expect to get a 'ouse for nothing.'

'Suppose we admits as it's wrong, just for the sake of argyment,' said
Crass in a jeering tone.  'Wot then?  Wot about it?  'Ow's it agoin' to
be altered.'

'Yes!' cried Harlow triumphantly.  'That's the bloody question!  'Ow's
it goin' to be altered?  It can't be done!'

There was a general murmur of satisfaction.  Nearly everyone seemed
very pleased to think that the existing state of things could not
possibly be altered.

'Whether it can be altered or not, whether it's right or wrong,
landlordism is one of the causes of poverty,' Owen repeated.  'Poverty
is not caused by men and women getting married; it's not caused by
machinery; it's not caused by "over-production"; it's not caused by
drink or laziness; and it's not caused by "over-population".  It's
caused by Private Monopoly.  That is the present system.  They have
monopolized everything that it is possible to monopolize; they have got
the whole earth, the minerals in the earth and the streams that water
the earth.  The only reason they have not monopolized the daylight and
the air is that it is not possible to do it.  If it were possible to
construct huge gasometers and to draw together and compress within them
the whole of the atmosphere, it would have been done long ago, and we
should have been compelled to work for them in order to get money to
buy air to breathe.  And if that seemingly impossible thing were
accomplished tomorrow, you would see thousands of people dying for want
of air--or of the money to buy it--even as now thousands are dying for
want of the other necessities of life. You would see people going about
gasping for breath, and telling each other that the likes of them could
not expect to have air to breathe unless they had the money to pay for
it.  Most of you here, for instance, would think and say so.  Even as
you think at present that it's right for so few people to own the
Earth, the Minerals and the Water, which are all just as necessary as
is the air.  In exactly the same spirit as you now say: "It's Their
Land," "It's Their Water," "It's Their Coal," "It's Their Iron," so you
would say "It's Their Air," "These are their gasometers, and what right
have the likes of us to expect them to allow us to breathe for
nothing?"  And even while he is doing this the air monopolist will be
preaching sermons on the Brotherhood of Man; he will be dispensing
advice on "Christian Duty" in the Sunday magazines; he will give
utterance to numerous more or less moral maxims for the guidance of the
young.  And meantime, all around, people will be dying for want of some
of the air that he will have bottled up in his gasometers.  And when
you are all dragging out a miserable existence, gasping for breath or
dying for want of air, if one of your number suggests smashing a hole
in the side of one of the gasometers, you will all fall upon him in the
name of law and order, and after doing your best to tear him limb from
limb, you'll drag him, covered with blood, in triumph to the nearest
Police Station and deliver him up to "justice" in the hope of being
given a few half-pounds of air for your trouble.'

'I suppose you think the landlords ought to let people live in their
'ouses for nothing?' said Crass, breaking the silence that followed.

'Certainly,' remarked Harlow, pretending to be suddenly converted to
Owen's views, 'I reckon the landlord ought to pay the rent to the
tenant!'

'Of course, Landlordism is not the only cause,' said Owen, ignoring
these remarks. 'The wonderful system fosters a great many others.
Employers of labour, for instance, are as great a cause of poverty as
landlords are.'

This extraordinary statement was received with astonished silence.

'Do you mean to say that if I'm out of work and a master gives me a
job, that 'e's doin' me a injury?' said Crass at length.

'No, of course not,' replied Owen.

'Well, what the bloody 'ell DO yer mean, then?'

'I mean this: supposing that the owner of a house wishes to have it
repainted.  What does he usually do?'

'As a rule, 'e goes to three or four master painters and asks 'em to
give 'im a price for the job.'

'Yes; and those master painters are so eager to get the work that they
cut the price down to what they think is the lowest possible point,'
answered Owen, 'and the lowest usually gets the job.  The successful
tenderer has usually cut the price so fine that to make it pay he has
to scamp the work, pay low wages, and drive and sweat the men whom he
employs.  He wants them to do two days' work for one day's pay.  The
result is that a job which--if it were done properly--would employ say
twenty men for two months, is rushed and scamped in half that time with
half that number of men.

'This means that--in one such case as this--ten men are deprived of one
month's employment; and ten other men are deprived of two months'
employment; and all because the employers have been cutting each
other's throats to get the work.'

'And we can't 'elp ourselves, you nor me either,' said Harlow.
'Supposing one of us on this job was to make up 'is mind not to tear
into it like we do, but just keep on steady and do a fair day's work:
wot would 'appen?'

No one answered; but the same thought was in everyone's mind.  Such a
one would be quickly marked by Hunter; and even if the latter failed to
notice it would not be long before Crass reported his conduct.

'We can't 'elp ourselves,' said Easton, gloomily.  'If one man won't do
it there's twenty others ready to take 'is place.'

'We could help ourselves to a certain extent if we would stand by each
other.  If, for instance, we all belonged to the Society,' said Owen.

'I don't believe in the Society,' observed Crass.  'I can't see as it's
right that a inferior man should 'ave the same wages as me.'

'They're a drunken lot of beer-swillers,' remarked Slyme.  'That's why
they always 'as their meetings in public 'ouses.'

Harlow made no comment on this question.  He had at one time belonged
to the Union and he was rather ashamed of having fallen away from it.

'Wot good 'as the Society ever done 'ere?' said Easton.  'None that I
ever 'eard of.'

'It might be able to do some good if most of us belonged to it; but
after all, that's another matter.  Whether we could help ourselves or
not, the fact remains that we don't.  But you must admit that this
competition of the employers is one of the causes of unemployment and
poverty, because it's not only in our line--exactly the same thing
happens in every other trade and industry.  Competing employers are the
upper and nether millstones which grind the workers between them.'

'I suppose you think there oughtn't to be no employers at all?' sneered
Crass.  'Or p'raps you think the masters ought to do all the bloody
work theirselves, and give us the money?'

'I don't see 'ow its goin' to be altered,' remarked Harlow.  'There
MUST be masters, and SOMEONE 'as to take charge of the work and do the
thinkin'.'

'Whether it can be altered or not,' said Owen, 'Landlordism and
Competing Employers are two of the causes of poverty.  But of course
they're only a small part of the system which produces luxury,
refinement and culture for a few, and condemns the majority to a
lifelong struggle with adversity, and many thousands to degradation,
hunger and rags.  This is the system you all uphold and defend,
although you don't mind admitting that it has made the world into a
hell.'

Crass slowly drew the Obscurer cutting from his waistcoat pocket, but
after a moment's thought he replaced it, deciding to defer its
production till a more suitable occasion.

'But you 'aven't told us yet 'ow you makes out that money causes
poverty,' cried Harlow, winking at the others.  'That's what I'M
anxious to 'ear about!'

'So am I,' remarked the man behind the moat.  'I was just wondering
whether I 'adn't better tell ole Misery that I don't want no wages this
week.'

'I think I'll tell 'im on Saterday to keep MY money and get 'imself a
few drinks with it,' said Philpot.  'It might cheer 'im up a bit and
make 'im a little more sociable and friendly like.'

'Money IS the principal cause of poverty,' said Owen.

''Ow do yer make it out?' cried Sawkins.

But their curiosity had to remain unsatisfied for the time being
because Crass announced that it was 'just on it'.



Chapter 16

True Freedom


About three o'clock that afternoon, Rushton suddenly appeared and began
walking silently about the house, and listening outside the doors of
rooms where the hands were working.  He did not succeed in catching
anyone idling or smoking or talking.  The nearest approach to what the
men called 'a capture' that he made was, as he stood outside the door
of one of the upper rooms in which Philpot and Harlow were working, he
heard them singing one of Sankey's hymns--'Work! for the night is
coming'.  He listened to two verses and several repetitions of the
chorus.  Being a 'Christian', he could scarcely object to this,
especially as by peeping through the partly open door  he could see
that they were suiting the action to the word.  When he went into the
room they glanced around to see who it was, and stopped singing.
Rushton did not speak, but stood in the middle of the floor, silently
watching them as they worked, for about a quarter of an hour.  Then,
without having uttered a syllable, he turned and went out.

They heard him softly descend the stairs, and Harlow, turning to
Philpot said in a hoarse whisper:

'What do you think of the b--r, standing there watchin' us like that,
as if we was a couple of bloody convicts?  If it wasn't that I've got
someone else beside myself to think of, I would 'ave sloshed the bloody
sod in the mouth with this pound brush!'

'Yes; it does make yer feel like that, mate,' replied Philpot, 'but of
course we mustn't give way to it.'

'Several times,' continued Harlow, who was livid with anger, 'I was on
the point of turnin' round and sayin' to 'im, "What the bloody 'ell do
you mean by standin' there and watchin' me, you bloody, psalm-singin'
swine?"  It took me all my time to keep it in, I can tell you.'

Meanwhile, Rushton was still going about the house, occasionally
standing and watching the other men in the same manner as he had
watched Philpot and Harlow.

None of the men looked round from their work or spoke either to Rushton
or to each other.  The only sounds heard were the noises made by the
saws and hammers of the carpenters who were fixing the frieze rails and
dado rails or repairing parts of the woodwork in some of the rooms.

Crass placed himself in Rushton's way several times with the hope of
being spoken to, but beyond curtly acknowledging the 'foreman's'
servile 'Good hafternoon, sir,' the master took no notice of him.

After about an hour spent in this manner Rushton went away, but as no
one saw him go, it was not until some considerable time after his
departure that they knew that he was gone.

Owen was secretly very disappointed.  'I thought he had come to tell me
about the drawing-room,' he said to himself, 'but I suppose it's not
decided yet.'

Just as the 'hands' were beginning to breathe freely again, Misery
arrived, carrying some rolled-up papers in his hand.  He also flitted
silently from one room to another, peering round corners and listening
at doors in the hope of seeing or hearing something which would give
him an excuse for making an example of someone.  Disappointed in this,
he presently crawled upstairs to the room where Owen was working and,
handing to him the roll of papers he had been carrying, said:

'Mr Sweater had decided to 'ave this work done, so you can start on it
as soon as you like.'

It is impossible to describe, without appearing to exaggerate, the
emotions experienced by Owen as he heard this announcement.  For one
thing it meant that the work at this house would last longer than it
would otherwise have done; and it also meant that he would be paid for
the extra time he had spent on the drawings, besides having his wages
increased--for he was always paid an extra penny an hour when engaged
on special work, such as graining or sign-writing or work of the
present kind.  But these considerations did not occur to him at the
moment at all, for to him it meant much more.  Since his first
conversation on the subject with Rushton he had though of little else
than this work.

In a sense he had been DOING it ever since.  He had thought and planned
and altered the details of the work repeatedly.  The colours for the
different parts had been selected and rejected and re-selected over and
over again.  A keen desire to do the work had grown within him, but he
had scarcely allowed himself to hope that it would be done at all.  His
face flushed slightly as he took the drawings from Hunter.

'You can make a start on it tomorrow morning,' continued that
gentleman.  'I'll tell Crass to send someone else up 'ere to finish
this room.'

'I shan't be able to commence tomorrow, because the ceiling and walls
will have to be painted first.'

'Yes: I know.  You and Easton can do that.  One coat tomorrow, another
on Friday and the third on Saturday--that is, unless you can make it do
with two coats.  Even if it has to be the three, you will be able to go
on with your decoratin' on Monday.'

'I won't be able to start on Monday, because I shall have to make some
working drawings first.'

'Workin' drorins!' ejaculated Misery with a puzzled expression.  'Wot
workin' drorins?  You've got them, ain't yer?' pointing to the roll of
papers.

'Yes: but as the same ornaments are repeated several times, I shall
have to make a number of full-sized drawings, with perforated outlines,
to transfer the design to the walls,' said Owen, and he proceeded to
laboriously explain the processes.

Nimrod looked at him suspiciously.  'Is all that really necessary?' he
asked.  'Couldn't you just copy it on the wall, free-hand?'

'No; that wouldn't do.  It would take much longer that way.'

This consideration appealed to Misery.

'Ah, well,' he sighed.  'I s'pose you'll 'ave to do it the way you
said; but for goodness sake don't spend too much time over it, because
we've took it very cheap.  We only took it on so as you could 'ave a
job, not that we expect to make any profit out of it.'

'And I shall have to cut some stencils, so I shall need several sheets
of cartridge paper.'

Upon hearing of this addition expense, Misery's long visage appeared to
become several inches longer; but after a moment's thought he
brightened up.

'I'll tell you what!' he exclaimed with a cunning leer, 'there's lots
of odd rolls of wallpaper down at the shop.  Couldn't you manage with
some of that?'

'I'm afraid it wouldn't do,' replied Owen doubtfully, 'but I'll have a
look at it and if possible I'll use it.'

'Yes, do!' said Misery, pleased at the thought of saving something.
'Call at the shop on your way home tonight, and we'll see what we can
find.  'Ow long do you think it'll take you to make the drorins and the
stencils?'

'Well, today's Thursday.  If you let someone else help Easton to get
the room ready, I think I can get them done in time to bring them with
me on Monday morning.'

'Wot do yer mean, "bring them with you"?' demanded Nimrod.

'I shall have to do them at home, you know.'

'Do 'em at 'ome!  Why can't you do 'em 'ere?'

'Well, there's no table, for one thing.'

'Oh, but we can soon fit you out with a table. You can 'ave a pair of
paperhanger's tressels and boards for that matter.'

'I have a lot of sketches and things at home that I couldn't very well
bring here,' said Owen.

Misery argued about it for a long time, insisting that the drawings
should be made either on the 'job' or at the paint-shop down at the
yard.  How, he asked, was he to know at what hour Owen commenced or
left off working, if the latter did them at home?

'I shan't charge any more time than I really work,' replied Owen.  'I
can't possibly do them here or at the paint-shop.  I know I should only
make a mess of them under such conditions.'

'Well, I s'pose you'll 'ave to 'ave your own way,' said Misery,
dolefully.  'I'll let Harlow help Easton paint the room out, so as you
can get your stencils and things ready.  But for Gord's sake get 'em
done as quick as you can.  If you could manage to get done by Friday
and come down and help Easton on Saturday, it would be so much the
better.  And when you do get a start on the decoratin', I shouldn't
take too much care over it, you know, if I was you, because we 'ad to
take the job for next to nothing or Mr Sweater would never 'ave 'ad it
done at all!'

Nimrod now began to crawl about the house, snarling and grumbling at
everyone.

'Now then, you chaps.  Rouse yourselves!' he bellowed, 'you seem to
think this is a 'orspital.  If some of you don't make a better show
than this, I'll 'ave to 'ave a Alteration!  There's plenty of chaps
walkin' about doin' nothin' who'll be only too glad of a job!'

He went into the scullery, where Crass was mixing some colour.

'Look 'ere, Crass!' he said.  'I'm not at all satisfied with the way
you're gettin' on with the work.  You must push the chaps a bit more
than you're doin'.  There's not enough being done, by a long way.  We
shall lose money over this job before we're finished!'

Crass--whose fat face had turned a ghastly green with fright--mumbled
something about getting on with it as fast as he could.

'Well, you'll 'ave to make 'em move a bit quicker than this!' Misery
howled, 'or there'll 'ave to be a ALTERATION!'

By an 'alteration' Crass understood that he might get the sack, or that
someone else might be put in charge of the job, and that would of
course reduce him to the ranks and do away with his chance of being
kept on longer than the others.  He determined to try to ingratiate
himself with Hunter and appease his wrath by sacrificing someone else.
He glanced cautiously into the kitchen and up the passage and then,
lowering his voice, he said:

'They all shapes pretty well, except Newman.  I would 'ave told you
about 'im before, but I thought I'd give 'im a fair chance.  I've spoke
to 'im several times myself about not doin' enough, but it don't seem
to make no difference.'

'I've 'ad me eye on 'im meself for some time,' replied Nimrod in the
same tone.  'Anybody would think the work was goin' to be sent to a
Exhibition, the way 'e messes about with it, rubbing it with glasspaper
and stopping up every little crack!  I can't understand where 'e gets
all the glasspaper FROM.'

''E brings it 'isself!' said Crass hoarsely.  'I know for a fact that
'e bought two 'a'penny sheets of it, last week out of 'is own money!'

'Oh, 'e did, did 'e?' snarled Misery.  'I'll give 'im glasspaper! I'll
'ave a Alteration!'

He went into the hall, where he remained alone for a considerable time,
brooding.  At last, with the manner of one who has resolved on a
certain course of action, he turned and entered the room where Philpot
and Harlow were working.

'You both get sevenpence an hour, don't you?' he said.

They both replied to the affirmative.

'I've never worked under price yet,' added Harlow.

'Nor me neither,' observed Philpot.

'Well, of course you can please yourselves,' Hunter continued, 'but
after this week we've decided not to pay more than six and a half.
Things is cut so fine nowadays that we can't afford to go on payin'
sevenpence any longer.  You can work up till tomorrow night on the old
terms, but if you're not willin' to accept six and a half you needn't
come on Saturday morning.  Please yourselves.  Take it or leave it.'

Harlow and Philpot were both too much astonished to say anything in
reply to this cheerful announcement, and Hunter, with the final remark,
'You can think it over,' left them and went to deliver the same
ultimatum to all the other full-price men, who took it in the same way
as Philpot and Harlow had done.  Crass and Owen were the only two whose
wages were not reduced.

It will be remembered that Newman was one of those who were already
working for the reduced rate.  Misery found him alone in one of the
upper rooms, to which he was giving the final coat.  He was at his old
tricks.  The woodwork of the cupboard be was doing was in a rather
damaged condition, and he was facing up the dents with white-lead putty
before painting it.  He knew quite well that Hunter objected to any but
very large holes or cracks being stopped, and yet somehow  or other he
could not scamp the work to the extent that he was ordered to; and so,
almost by stealth, he was in the habit of doing it--not properly but as
well as he dared.  He even went to the length of occasionally buying a
few sheets of glasspaper with his own money, as Crass had told Hunter.
When the latter came into the room he stood with a sneer on his face,
watching Newman for about five minutes before he spoke.  The workman
became very nervous and awkward under this scrutiny.

'You can make out yer time-sheet and come to the office for yer money
at five o'clock,' said Nimrod at last.  'We shan't require your
valuable services no more after tonight.'

Newman went white.

'Why, what's wrong?' said he.  'What have I done?'

'Oh, it's not wot you've DONE,' replied Misery.  'It's wot you've not
done.  That's wot's wrong!  You've not done enough, that's all!'  And
without further parley he turned and went out.

Newman stood in the darkening room feeling as if his heart had turned
to lead.  There rose before his mind the picture of his home and
family.  He could see them as they were at this very moment, the wife
probably just beginning to prepare the evening meal, and the children
setting the cups and saucers and other things on the kitchen table--a
noisy work, enlivened with many a frolic and childish dispute.  Even
the two-year-old baby insisted on helping, although she always put
everything in the wrong place and made all sorts of funny mistakes.
They had all been so happy lately because they knew that he had work
that would last till nearly Christmas--if not longer.  And now this had
happened--to plunge them back into the abyss of wretchedness from which
they had so recently escaped.  They still owed several weeks' rent, and
were already so much in debt to the baker and the grocer that it was
hopeless to expect any further credit.

'My God!' said Newman, realizing the almost utter hopelessness of the
chance of obtaining another 'job' and unconsciously speaking aloud. 'My
God!  How can I tell them?  What WILL become of us?'

Having accomplished the objects of his visit, Hunter shortly afterwards
departed, possibly congratulating himself that he had not been hiding
his light under a bushel, but that he had set it upon a candlestick and
given light unto all that were within that house.

As soon as they knew that he was gone, the men began to gather into
little groups, but in a little while they nearly all found themselves
in the kitchen, discussing the reduction.  Sawkins and the other
'lightweights' remained at their work.  Some of them got only fourpence
halfpenny--Sawkins was paid fivepence--so none of these were affected
by the change.  The other two fresh hands--the journeymen--joined the
crowd in the kitchen, being anxious to conceal the fact that they had
agreed to accept the reduced rate before being 'taken on'.  Owen also
was there, having heard the news from Philpot.

There was a lot of furious talk.  At first several of them spoke of
'chucking up', at once; but others were more prudent, for they knew
that if they did leave there were dozens of others who would be eager
to take their places.

'After all, you know,' said Slyme, who had--stowed away somewhere at
the back of his head--an idea of presently starting business on his own
account: he was only waiting until he had saved enough money, 'after
all, there's something in what 'Unter says.  It's very 'ard to get a
fair price for work nowadays.  Things IS cut very fine.'

'Yes! We know all about that!' shouted Harlow.  'And who the bloody
'ell is it cuts 'em?  Why, sich b--rs as 'Unter and Rushton!  If this
firm 'adn't cut this job so fine, some other firm would 'ave 'ad it for
more money.  Rushton's cuttin' it fine didn't MAKE this job, did it?
It would 'ave been done just the same if they 'adn't tendered for it at
all!  The only difference is that we should 'ave been workin' for some
other master.'

'I don't believe the bloody job's cut fine at all!' said Philpot.

'Rushton is a pal of Sweater's and they're both members of the Town
Council.'

'That may be,' replied Slyme; 'but all the same I believe Sweater got
several other prices besides Rushton's--friend or no friend; and you
can't blame 'im: it's only business.  But pr'aps Rushton got the
preference--Sweater may 'ave told 'im the others' prices.'

'Yes, and a bloody fine lot of prices they was, too, if the truth was
known!' said Bundy.  'There was six other firms after this job to my
knowledge--Pushem and Sloggem, Bluffum and Doemdown, Dodger and
Scampit, Snatcham and Graball, Smeeriton and Leavit, Makehaste and
Sloggitt, and Gord only knows 'ow many more.'

At this moment Newman came into the room.  He looked so white and upset
that the others involuntarily paused in their conversation.

'Well, what do YOU think of it?' asked Harlow.

'Think of what?' said Newman.

'Why, didn't 'Unter tell you?' cried several voices, whose owners
looked suspiciously at him.  They thought--if Hunter had not spoken to
Newman, it must be because he was already working under price. There
had been a rumour going about the last few days to that effect.

'Didn't Misery tell you?  They're not goin' to pay more than six and a
half after this week.'

'That's not what 'e said to me.  'E just told me to knock off. Said  I
didn't do enough for 'em.'

'Jesus Christ!' exclaimed Crass, pretending to be overcome with
surprise.

Newman's account of what had transpired was listened to in gloomy
silence.  'Those who--a few minutes previously--had been talking loudly
of chucking up the job became filled with apprehension that they might
be served in the same manner as he had been.  Crass was one of the
loudest in his expression of astonishment and indignation, but he
rather overdid it and only succeeded in confirming the secret suspicion
of the others that he had had something to do with Hunter's action.

The result of the discussion was that they decided to submit to
Misery's terms for the time being, until they could see a chance of
getting work elsewhere.

As Owen had to go to the office to see the wallpaper spoken of by
Hunter, he accompanied Newman when the latter went to get his wages.
Nimrod was waiting for them, and had the money ready in an envelope,
which he handed to Newman, who took it without speaking and went away.

Misery had been rummaging amongst the old wallpapers, and had got out a
great heap of odd rolls, which he now submitted to Owen, but after
examining them the latter said that they were unsuitable for the
purpose, so after some argument Misery was compelled to sign an order
for some proper cartridge paper, which Owen obtained at a stationer's
on his way home.

The next morning, when Misery went to the 'Cave', he was in a fearful
rage, and he kicked up a terrible row with Crass.  He said that Mr
Rushton had been complaining of the lack of discipline on the job, and
he told Crass to tell all the hands that for the future singing in
working hours was strictly forbidden, and anyone caught breaking this
rule would be instantly dismissed.

Several times during the following days Nimrod called at Owen's flat to
see how the work was progressing and to impress upon him the necessity
of not taking too much trouble over it.



Chapter 17

The Rev. John Starr


'What time is it now, Mum?' asked Frankie as soon as he had finished
dinner on the following Sunday.

'Two o'clock.'

'Hooray!  Only one more hour and Charley will be here!  Oh, I wish it
was three o'clock now, don't you, Mother?'

'No, dear, I don't.  You're not dressed yet, you know.'

Frankie made a grimace.

'You're surely not going to make me wear my velvets, are you, Mum?
Can't I go just as I am, in my old clothes?'

The 'velvets' was a brown suit of that material that Nora had made out
of the least worn parts of an old costume of her own.

'Of course not: if you went as you are now, you'd have everyone staring
at you.'

'Well, I suppose I'll have to put up with it,' said Frankie, resignedly.

'And I think you'd better begin to dress me now, don't you?'

'Oh, there's plenty of time yet; you'd only make yourself untidy and
then I should have the trouble all over again.  Play with your toys a
little while, and when I've done the washing up I'll get you ready.'

Frankie obeyed, and for about ten minutes his mother heard him in the
next room rummaging in the box where he stored his collection of
'things'.  At the end of that time, however, he returned to the
kitchen.  'Is it time to dress me yet, Mum?'

'No, dear, not yet.  You needn't be afraid; you'll be ready in plenty
of time.'

'But I can't help being afraid; you might forget.'

'Oh, I shan't forget.  There's lots of time.'

'Well, you know, I should be much easier in my mind if you would dress
me now, because perhaps our clock's wrong, or p'r'aps when you begin
dressing me you'll find some buttons off or something, and then
there'll be a lot of time wasted sewing them on; or p'r'aps you won't
be able to find my clean stockings or something and then while you're
looking for it Charley might come, and if he sees I'm not ready he
mightn't wait for me.'

'Oh, dear!' said Nora, pretending to be alarmed at this appalling list
of possibilities.  'I suppose it will be safer to dress you at once.
It's very evident you won't let me have much peace until it is done,
but mind when you're dressed you'll have to sit down quietly and wait
till he comes, because I don't want the trouble of dressing you twice.'

'Oh, I don't mind sitting still,' returned Frankie, loftily.  'That's
very easy.

'I don't mind having to take care of my clothes,' said Frankie as his
mother--having washed and dressed him, was putting the finishing
touches to his hair, brushing and combing and curling the long yellow
locks into ringlets round her fingers, 'the only thing I don't like is
having my hair done.  You know all these curls are quite unnecessary.
I'm sure it would save you a lot of trouble if you wouldn't mind
cutting them off.'

Nora did not answer: somehow or other she was unwilling to comply with
this often-repeated entreaty.  It seemed to her that when this hair was
cut off the child would have become a different individual--more
separate and independent.

'If you don't want to cut it off for your own sake, you might do it for
my sake, because I think it's the reason some of the big boys don't
want to play with me, and some of them shout after me and say I'm a
girl, and sometimes they sneak up behind me and pull it.  Only
yesterday I had to have a fight with a boy for doing it: and even
Charley Linden laughs at me, and he's my best friend--except you and
Dad of course.

'Why don't you cut it off, Mum?'

'I am going to cut it as I promised you, after your next birthday.'

'Then I shall be jolly glad when it comes.  Won't you?  Why, what's the
matter, Mum?  What are you crying for?'  Frankie was so concerned that
he began to cry also, wondering if he had done or said something wrong.
He kissed her repeatedly, stroking her face with his hand. What's the
matter, Mother?'

'I was thinking that when you're over seven and you've had your hair
cut short you won't be a baby any more.'

'Why, I'm not a baby now, am I? Here, look at this!'

He strode over to the wall and, dragging out two chairs, he placed them
in the middle of the room, back to back, about fifteen inches apart,
and before his mother realized what he was doing he had climbed up and
stood with one leg on the back of each chair.

'I should like to see a baby who could do this,' he cried, with his
face wet with tears.  'You needn't lift me down.  I can get down by
myself.  Babies can't do tricks like these or even wipe up the spoons
and forks or sweep the passage.  But you needn't cut it off if you
don't want to.  I'll bear it as long as you like.  Only don't cry any
more, because it makes me miserable.  If I cry when I fall down or when
you pull my hair when you're combing it you always tell me to bear it
like a man and not be a baby, and now you're crying yourself just
because I'm not a baby.  You ought to be jolly glad that I'm nearly
grown up into a man, because you know I've promised to build you a
house with the money I earn, and then you needn't do no more work.
We'll have a servant the same as the people downstairs, and Dad can
stop at home and sit by the fire and read the paper or play with me and
Maud and have pillow fights and tell stories and--'

'It's all right, dearie,' said Nora, kissing him.  'I'm not crying now,
and you mustn't either, or your eyes will be all red and you won't be
able to go with Charley at all.'

When she had finished dressing him, Frankie sat for some time in
silence, apparently lost in thought.  At last he said:

'Why don't you get a baby, Mother?  You could nurse it, and I could
have it to play with instead of going out in the street.'

'We can't afford to keep a baby, dear.  You know, even as it is,
sometimes we have to go without things we want because we haven't the
money to buy them.  Babies need many things that cost lots of money.'

'When I build our house when I'm a man, I'll take jolly good care not
to have a gas-stove in it.  That's what runs away with all the money;
we're always putting pennies in the slot.  And that reminds me: Charley
said I'll have to take a ha'penny to put in the mishnery box. Oh, dear,
I'm tired of sitting still.  I wish he'd come. What time is it now,
Mother?'

Before she could answer both Frankie's anxiety and the painful ordeal
of sitting still were terminated by the loud peal at the bell
announcing Charley's arrival, and Frankie, without troubling to observe
the usual formality of looking out of the window to see if it was a
runaway ring, had clattered half-way downstairs before he heard his
mother calling him to come back for the halfpenny; then he clattered up
again and then down again at such a rate and with so much noise as to
rouse the indignation of all the respectable people in the house.

When he arrived at the bottom of the stairs he remembered that he had
omitted to say goodbye, and as it was too far to go up again he rang
the bell and then went into the middle of the road and looked up at the
window that Nora opened.

'Goodbye, Mother,' he shouted.  'Tell Dad I forgot to say it before I
came down.'

The School was not conducted in the chapel itself, but in a large
lecture hall under it.  At one end was a small platform raised about
six inches from the floor; on this was a chair and a small table.  A
number of groups of chairs and benches were arranged at intervals round
the sides and in the centre of the room, each group of seats
accommodating a separate class.  On the walls--which were painted a
pale green--were a number of  pictures: Moses striking the
Rock, the Israelites dancing round the Golden Calf, and so on.  As the
reader is aware, Frankie had never been to a Sunday School of any kind
before, and he stood for a moment looking in at the door and half
afraid to enter.  The lessons had already commenced, but the scholars
had not yet settled down to work.

The scene was one of some disorder: some of the children talking,
laughing or playing, and the teachers alternately threatening and
coaxing them.  The girls' and the very young children's classes were
presided over by ladies: the boys' teachers were men.

The reader already has some slight knowledge of a few of these people.
There was Mr Didlum, Mr Sweater, Mr Rushton and Mr Hunter and Mrs
Starvem (Ruth Easton's former mistress).  On this occasion, in addition
to the teachers and other officials of the Sunday School, there were
also present a considerable number of prettily dressed ladies and a few
gentlemen, who had come in the hope of meeting the Rev. John Starr, the
young clergyman who was going to be their minister for the next few
weeks during the absence of their regular shepherd, Mr Belcher, who was
going away for a holiday for the benefit of his health.  Mr Belcher was
not suffering from any particular malady, but was merely 'run down',
and rumour had it that this condition had been brought about by the
rigorous asceticism of his life and his intense devotion to the arduous
labours of his holy calling.

Mr Starr had conducted the service in the Shining Light Chapel that
morning, and a great sensation had been produced by the young
minister's earnest and eloquent address, which was of a very different
style from that of their regular minister.  Although perhaps they had
not quite grasped the real significance of all that he had said, most
of them had been favourably impressed by the young clergyman's
appearance and manner in the morning: but that might have arisen from
prepossession and force of habit, for they were accustomed, as a matter
of course, to think well of any minister.  There were, however, one or
two members of the congregation who were not without some misgivings
and doubts as to the soundness of his doctrines.  Mr Starr had promised
that he would look in some time during the afternoon to say a few words
to the Sunday School children, and consequently on this particular
afternoon all the grown-ups were looking forward so eagerly to hearing
him again that not much was done in the way of lessons.  Every time a
late arrival entered all eyes were directed towards the door in the
hope and expectation that it was he.

When Frankie, standing at the door, saw all the people looking at him
he drew back timidly.

'Come on, man,' said Charley.  'You needn't be afraid; it's not like a
weekday school; they can't do nothing to us, not even if we don't
behave ourselves.  There's our class over in that corner and that's our
teacher, Mr Hunter.  You can sit next to me. Come on!'

Thus encouraged, Frankie followed Charley over to the class, and both
sat down.  The teacher was so kind and spoke so gently to the children
that in a few minutes Frankie felt quite at home.

When Hunter noticed how well cared for and well dressed he was he
thought the child must belong to well-to-do, respectable parents.
Frankie did not pay much attention to the lesson, for he was too much
interested in the pictures on the walls and in looking at the other
children.  He also noticed a very fat man who was not teaching at all,
but drifted aimlessly about he room from one class to another.  After a
time he came and stood by the class where Frankie was, and, after
nodding to Hunter, remained near, listening and smiling patronizingly
at the children.  He was arrayed in a long garment of costly black
cloth, a sort of frock coat, and by the rotundity of his figure he
seemed to be one of those accustomed to sit in the chief places at
feasts.  This was the Rev. Mr Belcher, minister of the Shining Light
Chapel.  His short, thick neck was surrounded by a studless collar, and
apparently buttonless, being fastened in some mysterious way known only
to himself, and he showed no shirt front.

The long garment beforementioned was unbuttoned and through the opening
there protruded a vast expanse of waistcoat and trousers, distended
almost to bursting by the huge globe of flesh they contained.  A gold
watch-chain with a locket extended partly across the visible portion of
the envelope of the globe.  He had very large feet which were carefully
encased in soft calfskin boots.  If he had removed the long garment,
this individual would have resembled a balloon: the feet representing
the car and the small head that surmounted the globe, the safety valve;
as it was it did actually serve the purpose of a safety valve, the
owner being, in consequence of gross overfeeding and lack of natural
exercise, afflicted with chronic flatulence, which manifested itself in
frequent belchings forth through the mouth of the foul gases generated
in the stomach by the decomposition of the foods with which it was
generally loaded. But as the Rev. Mr Belcher had never been seen with
his coat off, no one ever noticed the resemblance.  It was not
necessary for him to take his coat off: his part in life was not to
help to produce, but to help to devour the produce of the labour of
others.

After exchanging a few words and grins with Hunter, he moved on to
another class, and presently Frankie with a feeling of awe noticed that
the confused murmuring sound that had hitherto pervaded the place was
hushed.  The time allotted for lessons had expired, and the teachers
were quietly distributing hymn-books to the children. Meanwhile the
balloon had drifted up to the end of the hall and had ascended the
platform, where it remained stationary by the side of the table,
occasionally emitting puffs of gas through the safety valve. On the
table were several books, and also a pile of folded cards. These latter
were about six inches by three inches; there was some printing on the
outside: one of them was lying open on the table, showing the inside,
which was ruled and had money columns.

Presently Mr Belcher reached out a flabby white hand and, taking up one
of the folded cards, he looked around upon the under-fed, ill-clad
children with a large, sweet, benevolent, fatherly smile, and then in a
drawling voice occasionally broken by explosions of flatulence, he said:

'My dear children.  This afternoon as I was standing near Brother
Hunter's class I heard him telling them of the wanderings of the
Children of Israel in the wilderness, and of all the wonderful things
that were done for them; and I thought how sad it was that they were so
ungrateful.

'Now those ungrateful Israelites had received many things, but we have
even more cause to be grateful than they had, for we have received even
more abundantly than they did.'  (Here the good man's voice was stilled
by a succession of explosions.)  'And I am sure,' he resumed, 'that
none of you would like to be even as those Israelites, ungrateful for
all the good things you have received.  Oh, how thankful you should be
for having been made happy English children. Now, I am sure that you
are grateful and that you will all be very glad of an opportunity of
showing your gratitude by doing something in return.

'Doubtless some of you have noticed the unseemly condition of the
interior of our Chapel.  The flooring is broken in countless places.
the walls are sadly in need of cleansing and distempering, and they
also need cementing externally to keep out the draught.  The seats and
benches and the chairs are also in a most unseemly condition and need
varnishing.

'Now, therefore, after much earnest meditation and prayer, it has been
decided to open a Subscription List, and although times are very hard
just now, we believe we shall succeed in getting enough to have the
work done; so I want each one of you to take one of these cards and go
round to all your friends to see how much you can collect.  It doesn't
matter how trifling the amounts are, because the smallest donations
will be thankfully received.

'Now, I hope you will all do your very best.  Ask everyone you know; do
not refrain from asking people because you think that they are too poor
to give a donation, but remind them that if they cannot give their
thousands they can give the widow's mite.  Ask Everyone!  First of all
ask those whom you feel certain will give: then ask all those whom you
think may possibly give: and, finally, ask all those whom you feel
certain will not give: and you will be surprised to find that many of
these last will donate abundantly.

'If your friends are very poor and unable to give a large donation at
one time, a good plan would be to arrange to call upon them every
Saturday afternoon with your card to collect their donations.  And
while you are asking others, do not forget to give what you can
yourselves.  Just a little self-denial, and those pennies and
half-pennies which you so often spend on sweets and other unnecessary
things might be given--as a donation--to the good cause.'

Here the holy man paused again, and there was a rumbling, gurgling
noise in the interior of the balloon, followed by several escapes of
gas through the safety valve.  The paroxysm over, the apostle of
self-denial continued:

'All those who wish to collect donations will stay behind for a few
minutes after school, when Brother Hunter--who has kindly consented to
act as secretary to the fund--will issue the cards.

'I would like here to say a few words of thanks to Brother Hunter for
the great interest he has displayed in this matter, and for all the
trouble he is taking to help us to gather in the donations.'

This tribute was well deserved; Hunter in fact had originated the whole
scheme in the hope of securing the job for Rushton & Co., and
two-and-a-half per cent of the profits for himself.

Mr Belcher now replaced the collecting card on the table and, taking up
one of the hymn-books, gave out the words and afterwards conducted the
singing, flourishing one fat, flabby white hand in the air and holding
the book in the other.

As the last strains of the music died away, he closed his eyes and a
sweet smile widened his mouth as he stretched forth his right hand,
open, palm down, with the fingers close together, and said:

'Let us pray.'

With much shuffling of feet everyone knelt down.  Hunter's lanky form
was distributed over a very large area; his body lay along one of the
benches, his legs and feet sprawled over the floor, and his huge hands
clasped the sides of the seat.  His eyes were tightly closed and an
expression of the most intense misery pervaded his long face.

Mrs Starvem, being so fat that she knew if she once knelt down she
would never be able to get up again, compromised by sitting on the
extreme edge of her chair, resting her elbows on the back of the seat
in front of her, and burying her face in her hands.  It was a very
large face, but her hands were capacious enough to receive it.

In a seat at the back of the hall knelt a pale-faced, weary-looking
little woman about thirty-six years of age, very shabbily dressed, who
had come in during the singing.  This was Mrs White, the caretaker,
Bert White's mother.  When her husband died, the committee of the
Chapel, out of charity, gave her this work, for which they paid her six
shillings a week.  Of course, they could not offer her full employment;
the idea was that she could get other work as well, charing and things
of that kind, and do the Chapel work in between. There wasn't much to
do: just the heating furnace to light when necessary; the Chapel,
committee rooms, classrooms and Sunday School to sweep and scrub out
occasionally; the hymn-books to collect, etc. Whenever they had a tea
meeting--which was on an average about twice a week--there were the
trestle tables to fix up, the chairs to arrange, the table to set out,
and then, supervised by Miss Didlum or some other lady, the tea to
make.  There was rather a lot to do on the days following these
functions: the washing up, the tables and chairs to put away, the floor
to sweep, and so on; but the extra work was supposed to be compensated
by the cakes and broken victuals generally left over from the feast,
which were much appreciated as a welcome change from the bread and
dripping or margarine that constituted Mrs White's and Bert's usual
fare.

There were several advantages attached to the position: the caretaker
became acquainted with the leading members and their wives, some of
who, out of charity, occasionally gave her a day's work as charwoman,
the wages being on about the same generous scale as those she earned at
the Chapel, sometimes supplemented by a parcel of broken victuals or
some castoff clothing.

An evil-minded, worldly or unconverted person might possibly sum up the
matter thus: these people required this work done: they employed this
woman to do it, taking advantage of her poverty to impose upon her
conditions of price and labour that they would not have liked to endure
themselves.  Although she worked very hard, early and late, the money
they paid her as wages was insufficient to enable her to provide
herself with the bare necessaries of life.  Then her employers, being
good, kind, generous, Christian people, came to the rescue and bestowed
charity, in the form of cast-off clothing and broken victuals.

Should any such evil-minded, worldly or unconverted persons happen to
read these lines, it is a sufficient answer to their impious and
malicious criticisms to say that no such thoughts ever entered the
simple mind of Mrs White herself: on the contrary, this very afternoon
as she knelt in the Chapel, wearing an old mantle that some years
previously had adorned the obese person of the saintly Mrs Starvem, her
heart was filled with gratitude towards her generous benefactors.

During the prayer the door was softly opened: a gentleman in clerical
dress entered on tiptoe and knelt down next to Mr Didlum.  He came in
very softly, but all the same most of those present heard him and
lifted their heads or peeped through their fingers to see who it was,
and when they recognized him a sound like a sigh swept through the hall.

At the end of the prayer, amid groans and cries of 'Amen', the balloon
slowly descended from the platform, and collapsed into one of the
seats, and everyone rose up from the floor.  When all were seated and
the shuffling, coughing and blowing of noses had ceased Mr Didlum stood
up and said:

'Before we sing the closin' 'ymn, the gentleman hon my left, the Rev.
Mr John Starr, will say a few words.'

An expectant murmur rippled through the hall.  The ladies lifted their
eyebrows and nodded, smiled and whispered to each other; the gentlemen
assumed various attitudes and expressions; the children were very
quiet.  Everyone was in a state of suppressed excitement as John Starr
rose from his seat and, stepping up on to the platform, stood by the
side of the table, facing them.

He was about twenty-six years of age, tall and slenderly built.  His
clean-cut, intellectual face, with its lofty forehead, and his air of
refinement and culture were in striking contrast to the coarse
appearance of the other adults in the room: the vulgar, ignorant,
uncultivated crowd of profit-mongers and hucksters in front of him. But
it was not merely his air of good breeding and the general comeliness
of his exterior that attracted and held one.  There was an indefinable
something about him--an atmosphere of gentleness and love that seemed
to radiate from his whole being, almost compelling confidence and
affection from all those with whom he came in contact. As he stood
there facing the others with an inexpressibly winning smile upon his
comely face, it seemed impossible that there could be any fellowship
between him and them.

There was nothing in his appearance to give anyone even an inkling of
the truth, which was: that he was there for the purpose of bolstering
up the characters of the despicable crew of sweaters and slave-drivers
who paid his wages.

He did not give a very long address this afternoon--only just a Few
Words; but they were very precious, original and illuminating.  He told
them of certain Thoughts that had occurred to his mind on his way there
that afternoon; and as they listened, Sweater, Rushton, Didlum, Hunter,
and the other disciples exchanged significant looks and gestures.  Was
it not magnificent!  Such power!  Such reasoning!  In fact, as they
afterwards modestly admitted to each other, it was so profound that
even they experienced great difficulty in fathoming the speaker's
meaning.

As for the ladies, they were motionless and dumb with admiration. They
sat with flushed faces, shining eyes and palpitating hearts, looking
hungrily at the dear man as he proceeded:

'Unfortunately, our time this afternoon does not permit us to dwell at
length upon these Thoughts.  Perhaps at some future date we may have
the blessed privilege of so doing; but this afternoon I have been asked
to say a Few Words on another subject.  The failing health of your dear
minister has for some time past engaged the anxious attention of the
congregation.'

Sympathetic glances were directed towards the interesting invalid; the
ladies murmured, 'Poor dear!' and other expressions of anxious concern.

'Although naturally robust,' continued Starr, 'long, continued
Overwork, the loving solicitude for Others that often prevented him
taking even necessary repose, and a too rigorous devotion to the
practice of Self-denial have at last brought about the inevitable
Breakdown, and rendered a period of Rest absolutely imperative.'

The orator paused to take breath, and the silence that ensued was
disturbed only by faint rumblings in the interior of the ascetic victim
of overwork.

'With this laudable object,' proceeded Starr, 'a Subscription List was
quietly opened about a month ago, and those dear children who had cards
and assisted in the good work of collecting donations will be pleased
to hear that altogether a goodly sum was gathered, but as it was not
quite enough, the committee voted a further amount out of the General
Fund, and at a special meeting held last Friday evening, your dear
Shepherd was presented with an illuminated address, and a purse of gold
sufficient to defray the expenses of a month's holiday in the South of
France.

'Although, of course, he regrets being separated from you even for such
a brief period he feels that in going he is choosing the lesser of two
evils.  It is better to go to the South of France for a month than to
continue Working in spite of the warnings of exhausted nature and
perhaps be taken away from you altogether--to Heaven.'

'God forbid!' fervently ejaculated several disciples, and a ghastly
pallor overspread the features of the object of their prayers.

'Even as it is there is a certain amount of danger.  Let us hope and
pray for the best, but if the worst should happen and he is called upon
to Ascend, there will be some satisfaction in knowing that you have
done what you could to avert the dreadful calamity.'

Here, probably as a precaution against the possibility of an
involuntary ascent, a large quantity of gas was permitted to escape
through the safety valve of the balloon.

'He sets out on his pilgrimage tomorrow,' concluded Starr, 'and I am
sure he will be followed by the good wishes and prayers of all the
members of his flock.'

The reverend gentleman resumed his seat, and almost immediately it
became evident from the oscillations of the balloon that Mr Belcher was
desirous of rising to say a Few Words in acknowledgement, but he was
restrained by the entreaties of those near him, who besought him not to
exhaust himself.  He afterwards said that he would not have been able
to say much even if they had permitted him to speak, because he felt
too full.

'During the absence of our beloved pastor,' said Brother Didlum, who
now rose to give out the closing hymn, 'his flock will not be left
hentirely without a shepherd, for we 'ave arranged with Mr Starr to
come and say a Few Words to us hevery Sunday.'

From the manner in which they constantly referred to themselves, it
might have been thought that they were a flock of sheep instead of
being what they really were--a pack of wolves.

When they heard Brother Didlum's announcement a murmur of intense
rapture rose from the ladies, and Mr Starr rolled his eyes and smiled
sweetly.  Brother Didlum did not mention the details of the
'arrangement', to have done so at that time would have been most
unseemly, but the following extract from the accounts of the chapel
will not be out of place here: 'Paid to Rev. John Starr for Sunday,
Nov. 14--L4.4.0 per the treasurer.'  It was not a large sum considering
the great services rendered by Mr Starr, but, small as it was, it is to
be feared that many worldly, unconverted persons will think it was far
too much to pay for a Few Words, even such wise words as Mr John
Starr's admittedly always were.  But the Labourer is worthy of his hire.

After the 'service' was over, most of the children, including Charley
and Frankie, remained to get collecting cards. Mr Starr was surrounded
by a crowd of admirers, and a little later, when he rode away with Mr
Belcher and Mr Sweater in the latter's motor car, the ladies looked
hungrily after that conveyance, listening to the melancholy 'pip, pip'
of its hooter and trying to console themselves with the reflection that
they would see him again in a few hours' time at the evening service.



Chapter 18

The Lodger


In accordance with his arrangement with Hunter, Owen commenced the work
in the drawing-room on the Monday morning.  Harlow and Easton were
distempering some of the ceilings, and about ten o'clock they went down
to the scullery to get some more whitewash.  Crass was there as usual,
pretending to be very busy mixing colours.

'Well, wot do you think of it?' he said as he served them with what
they required.

'Think of what?' asked Easton.

'Why, hour speshul hartist,' replied Crass with a sneer.  'Do you think
'e's goin' to get through with it?'

'Shouldn't like to say,' replied Easton guardedly.

'You know it's one thing to draw on a bit of paper and colour it with a
penny box of paints, and quite another thing to do it on a wall or
ceiling,' continued Crass.  'Ain't it?'

'Yes; that's true enough,' said Harlow.

'Do you believe they're 'is own designs?' Crass went on.

'Be rather 'ard to tell,' remarked Easton, embarrassed.

Neither Harlow nor Easton shared Crass's sentiments in this matter, but
at the same time they could not afford to offend him by sticking up for
Owen.

'If you was to ast me, quietly,' Crass added, 'I should be more
inclined to say as 'e copied it all out of some book.'

'That's just about the size of it, mate,' agreed Harlow.

'It would be a bit of all right if 'e was to make a bloody mess of it,
wouldn't it?' Crass continued with a malignant leer.

'Not arf!' said Harlow.

When the two men regained the upper landing on which they were working
they exchanged significant glances and laughed quietly.  Hearing these
half-suppressed sounds of merriment, Philpot, who was working alone in
a room close by, put his head out of the doorway.

'Wot's the game?' he inquired in a low voice.

'Ole Crass ain't arf wild about Owen doin' that room,' replied Harlow,
and repeated the substance of Crass's remarks.

'It is a bit of a take-down for the bleeder, ain't it, 'avin' to play
second fiddle,' said Philpot with a delighted grin.

''E's opin' Owen'll make a mess of it,' Easton whispered.

'Well, 'e'll be disappointed, mate,' answered Philpot.  'I was workin'
along of Owen for Pushem and Sloggem about two year ago, and I seen 'im
do a job down at the Royal 'Otel--the smokin'-room ceilin' it was--and
I can tell you it looked a bloody treat!'

'I've heard tell of it,' said Harlow.

'There's no doubt Owen knows 'is work,' remarked Easton, 'although 'e
is a bit orf is onion about Socialism.'

'I don't know so much about that, mate,' returned Philpot.  'I agree
with a lot that 'e ses.  I've often thought the same things meself, but
I can't talk like 'im, 'cause I ain't got no 'ead for it.'

'I agree with some of it too,' said Harlow with a laugh, 'but all the
same 'e does say some bloody silly things, you must admit.  For
instance, that stuff about money bein' the cause of poverty.'

'Yes. I can't exactly see that meself,' agreed Philpot.

'We must tackle 'im about that at dinner-time,' said Harlow.  'I should
rather like to 'ear 'ow 'e makes it out.'

'For Gord's sake don't go startin' no arguments at dinner-time,' said
Easton.  'Leave 'im alone when 'e is quiet.'

'Yes; let's 'ave our dinner in peace, if possible,' said Philpot.
'Sh!!' he added, hoarsely, suddenly holding up his hand warningly. They
listened intently.  It was evident from the creaking of the stairs that
someone was crawling up them.  Philpot instantly disappeared.  Harlow
lifted up the pail of whitewash and set it down again noisily.

'I think we'd better 'ave the steps and the plank over this side,
Easton,' he said in a loud voice.

'Yes.  I think that'll be the best way,' replied Easton.

While they were arranging their scaffold to do the ceiling Crass
arrived on the landing.  He made no remark at first, but walked into
the room to see how many ceilings they had done.

'You'd better look alive, you chaps, he said as he went downstairs
again.  'If we don't get these ceilings finished by dinner-time,
Nimrod's sure to ramp.'

'All right,' said Harlow, gruffly.  'We'll bloody soon slosh 'em over.'

'Slosh' was a very suitable word; very descriptive of the manner in
which the work was done.  The cornices of the staircase ceilings were
enriched with plaster ornaments.  These ceilings were supposed to have
been washed off, but as the men who were put to do that work had not
been allowed sufficient time to do it properly, the crevices of the
ornaments were still filled up with old whitewash, and by the time
Harlow and Easton had 'sloshed' a lot more whitewash on to them they
were mere formless unsightly lumps of plaster.  The 'hands' who did the
'washing off' were not to blame.  They had been hunted away from the
work before it was half done.

While Harlow and Easton were distempering these ceilings, Philpot and
the other hands were proceeding with the painting in different parts of
the inside of the house, and Owen, assisted by Bert, was getting on
with the work in the drawing-room, striking chalk lines and measuring
and setting out the different panels.

There were no 'political' arguments that day at dinner-time, to the
disappointment of Crass, who was still waiting for an opportunity to
produce the Obscurer cutting.  After dinner, when the others had all
gone back to their work, Philpot unobtrusively returned to the kitchen
and gathered up the discarded paper wrappers in which some of the men
had brought their food.  Spreading one of these open, he shook the
crumbs from the others upon it.  In this way and by picking up
particles of bread from the floor, he collected a little pile of crumbs
and crusts.  To these he added some fragments that he had left from his
own dinner.  He then took the parcel upstairs and opening one of the
windows threw the crumbs on to the roof of the portico.  He had
scarcely closed the window when two starlings fluttered down and began
to eat.  Philpot watching them furtively from behind the shutter.  The
afternoon passed uneventfully. From one till five seemed a very long
time to most of the hands, but to Owen and his mate, who were doing
something in which they were able to feel some interest and pleasure,
the time passed so rapidly that they both regretted the approach of
evening.

'Other days,' remarked Bert, 'I always keeps on wishin' it was time to
go 'ome, but today seems to 'ave gorn like lightnin'!'

After leaving off that night, all the men kept together till they
arrived down town, and then separated.  Owen went by himself: Easton,
Philpot, Crass and Bundy adjourned to the 'Cricketers Arms' to have a
drink together before going home, and Slyme, who was a teetotaler, went
by himself, although he was now lodging with Easton.

'Don't wait for me,' said the latter as he went off with Crass and the
others.  'I shall most likely catch you up before you get there.'

'All right,' replied Slyme.

This evening Slyme did not take the direct road home.  He turned into
the main street, and, pausing before the window of a toy shop, examined
the articles displayed therein attentively.  After some minutes he
appeared to have come to a decision, and entering the shop he purchased
a baby's rattle for fourpence halfpenny.  It was a pretty toy made of
white bone and  wool, with a number of little bells hanging
upon it, and a ring of white bone at the end of the handle.

When he came out of the shop Slyme set out for home, this time walking
rapidly.  When he entered the house Ruth was sitting by the fire with
the baby on her lap.  She looked up with an expression of
disappointment as she perceived that he was alone.

'Where's Will got to again?' she asked.

'He's gone to 'ave a drink with some of the chaps.  He said he wouldn't
be long,' replied Slyme as he put his food basket on the dresser and
went upstairs to his room to wash and to change his clothes.

When he came down again, Easton had not yet arrived.

'Everything's ready, except just to make the tea,' said Ruth, who was
evidently annoyed at the continued absence of Easton, 'so you may as
well have yours now.'

'I'm in no hurry.  I'll wait a little and see if he comes.  He's sure
to be here soon.'

'If you're sure you don't mind, I shall be glad if you will wait,' said
Ruth, 'because it will save me making two lots of tea.'

They waited for about half an hour, talking at intervals in a
constrained, awkward way about trivial subjects.  Then as Easton did
not come, Ruth decided to serve Slyme without waiting any longer. With
this intention she laid the baby in its cot, but the child resented
this arrangement and began to cry, so she had to hold him under her
left arm while she made the tea.  Seeing her in this predicament, Slyme
exclaimed, holding out his hands:

'Here, let me hold him while you do that.'

'Will you?' said Ruth, who, in spite of her instinctive dislike of the
man, could not help feeling gratified with this attention.  'Well, mind
you don't let him fall.'

But the instant Slyme took hold of the child it began to cry even
louder than it did when it was put into the cradle.

'He's always like that with strangers,' apologized Ruth as she took him
back again.

'Wait a minute,' said Slyme, 'I've got something upstairs in my pocket
that will keep him quiet.  I'd forgotten all about it.'

He went up to his room and presently returned with the rattle.  When
the baby saw the bright colours and heard the tinkling of the bells he
crowed with delight, and reached out his hands eagerly towards it and
allowed Slyme to take him without a murmur of protest.  Before Ruth had
finished making and serving the tea the man and child were on the very
best of terms with each other, so much so indeed that when Ruth had
finished and went to take him again, the baby seemed reluctant to part
from Slyme, who had been dancing him in the air and tickling him in the
most delightful way.

Ruth, too, began to have a better opinion of Slyme, and felt inclined
to reproach herself for having taken such an unreasonable dislike of
him at first.  He was evidently a very good sort of fellow after all.

The baby had by this time discovered the use of the bone ring at the
end of the handle of the toy and was biting it energetically.

'It's a very beautiful rattle,' said Ruth.  'Thank you very much for
it.  It's just the very thing he wanted.'

'I heard you say the other day that he wanted something of the kind to
bite on to help his teeth through,' answered Slyme, 'and when I
happened to notice that in the shop I remembered what you said and
thought I'd bring it home.'

The baby took the ring out of its mouth and shaking the rattle
frantically in the air laughed and crowed merrily, looking at Slyme.

'Dad! Dad! Dad!' he cried, holding out his arms.

Slyme and Ruth burst out laughing.

'That's not your Dad, you silly boy,' she said, kissing the child as
she spoke.  'Your dad ought to be ashamed of himself for staying out
like this.  We'll give him dad, dad, dad, when he does come home, won't
we?'

But the baby only shook the rattle and rang the bells and laughed and
crowed and laughed again, louder than ever.



Chapter 19

The Filling of the Tank


Viewed from outside, the 'Cricketers Arms' was a pretentious-looking
building with plate-glass windows and a profusion of gilding.  The
pilasters were painted in imitation of different marbles and the doors
grained to represent costly woods.  There were panels containing
painted advertisements of wines and spirits and beer, written in gold,
and ornamented with gaudy colours.  On the lintel over the principal
entrance was inscribed in small white letters:

'A. Harpy.  Licensed to sell wines, spirits and malt liquor by retail
to be consumed either on or off the premises.'

The bar was arranged in the usual way, being divided into several
compartments.  First there was the 'Saloon Bar': on the glass of the
door leading into this was fixed a printed bill: 'No four ale served in
this bar.'  Next to the saloon bar was the jug and bottle department,
much appreciated by ladies who wished to indulge in a drop of gin on
the quiet.  There were also two small 'private' bars, only capable of
holding two or three persons, where nothing less than fourpennyworth of
spirits or glasses of ale at threepence were served. Finally, the
public bar, the largest compartment of all.  At each end, separating it
from the other departments, was a wooden partition, painted and
varnished.

Wooden forms fixed across the partitions and against the walls under
the windows provided seating accommodation for the customers.  A large
automatic musical instrument--a 'penny in the slot'
polyphone--resembling a grandfather's clock in shape--stood against one
of the partitions and close up to the counter, so that those behind the
bar could reach to wind it up.  Hanging on the partition near the
polyphone was a board about fifteen inches square, over the surface of
which were distributed a number of small hooks, numbered.  At the
bottom of the board was a net made of fine twine, extended by means of
a semi-circular piece of wire.  In this net several india-rubber rings
about three inches in diameter were lying.  There was no table in the
place but jutting out from the other partition was a hinged flap about
three feet long by twenty inches wide, which could be folded down when
not in use.  This was the shove-ha'penny board.  The coins--old French
pennies--used in playing this game were kept behind the bar and might
be borrowed on application.  On the partition, just above the
shove-ha'penny board was a neatly printed notice, framed and glazed:

                                 NOTICE

              Gentlemen using this house are requested to
                 refrain from using obscene language.

Alongside this notice were a number of gaudily- bills
advertising the local theatre and the music-hall, and another of a
travelling circus and menagerie, then visiting the town and encamped on
a piece of waste ground about half-way on the road to Windley.  The
fittings behind the bar, and the counter, were of polished mahogany,
with silvered plate glass at the back of the shelves.  On the shelves
were rows of bottles and cut-glass decanters, gin, whisky, brandy and
wines and liqueurs of different kinds.

When Crass, Philpot, Easton and Bundy entered, the landlord, a
well-fed, prosperous-looking individual in white shirt-sleeves, and a
bright maroon fancy waistcoat with a massive gold watch-chain and a
diamond ring, was conversing in an affable, friendly way with one of
his regular customers, who was sitting on the end of the seat close to
the counter, a shabbily dressed, bleary-eyed, degraded, beer-sodden,
trembling wretch, who spent the greater part of every day, and all his
money, in this bar.  He was a miserable-looking wreck of a man about
thirty years of age, supposed to be a carpenter, although he never
worked at that trade now.  It was commonly said that some years
previously he had married a woman considerably his senior, the landlady
of a third-rate lodging-house.  This business was evidently
sufficiently prosperous to enable him to exist without working and to
maintain himself in a condition of perpetual semi-intoxication.  This
besotted wretch practically lived at the 'Cricketers'.  He came
regularly very morning and sometimes earned a pint of beer by assisting
the barman to sweep up the sawdust or clean the windows.  He usually
remained in the bar until closing time every night.  He was a very good
customer; not only did he spend whatever money he could get hold of
himself, but he was the cause of others spending money, for he was
acquainted with most of the other regular customers, who, knowing his
impecunious condition, often stood him a drink 'for the good of the
house'.

The only other occupant of the public bar--previous to the entrance of
Crass and his mates--was a semi-drunken man, who appeared to be a
house-painter, sitting on the form near the shove-ha'penny board.  He
was wearing a battered bowler hat and the usual shabby clothes.  This
individual had a very thin, pale face, with a large, high-bridged nose,
and bore a striking resemblance to the portraits of the first Duke of
Wellington.  He was not a regular customer here, having dropped in
casually about two o'clock and had remained ever since.  He was
beginning to show the effects of the drink he had taken during that
time.

As Crass and the others came in they were hailed with enthusiasm by the
landlord and the Besotted Wretch, while the semi-drunk workman regarded
them with fishy eyes and stupid curiosity.

'Wot cheer, Bob?' said the landlord, affably, addressing Crass, and
nodding familiarly to the others.  ''Ow goes it?'

'All reet me ole dear!' replied Crass, jovially.  ''Ow's yerself?'

'A.1,' replied the 'Old Dear', getting up from his chair in readiness
to execute their orders.

'Well, wot's it to be?' inquired Philpot of the others generally.

'Mine's a pint o' beer,' said Crass.

'Half for me,' said Bundy.

'Half o' beer for me too,' replied Easton.

'That's one pint, two 'arves, and a pint o' porter for meself,' said
Philpot, turning and addressing the Old Dear.

While the landlord was serving these drinks the Besotted Wretch
finished his beer and set the empty glass down on the counter, and
Philpot observing this, said to him:

''Ave one along o' me?'

'I don't mind if I do,' replied the other.

When the drinks were served, Philpot, instead of paying for them,
winked significantly at the landlord, who nodded silently and
unobtrusively made an entry in an account book that was lying on one of
the shelves.  Although it was only Monday and he had been at work all
the previous week, Philpot was already stony broke.  This was accounted
for by the fact that on Saturday he had paid his landlady something on
account of the arrears of board and lodging money that had accumulated
while he was out of work; and he had also paid the Old Dear four
shillings for drinks obtained on tick during the last week.

'Well, 'ere's the skin orf yer nose,' said Crass, nodding to Philpot,
and taking a long pull at the pint glass which the latter had handed to
him.

Similar appropriate and friendly sentiments were expressed by the
others and suitably acknowledged by Philpot, the founder of the feast.

The Old Dear now put a penny in the slot of the polyphone, and winding
it up started it playing. It was some unfamiliar tune, but when the
Semi-drunk Painter heard it he rose unsteadily to his feet and began
shuffling and dancing about, singing:

                'Oh, we'll inwite you to the wedding,
                   An' we'll 'ave a glorious time!
                Where the boys an' girls is a-dancing,
                  An' we'll all get drunk on wine.'

''Ere! that's quite enough o' that!' cried the landlord, roughly.  'We
don't want that row 'ere.'

The Semi-drunk stopped, and looking stupidly at the Old Dear, sank
abashed on to the seat again.

'Well, we may as well sit as stand--for a few minutes,' remarked Crass,
suiting the action to the word.  The others followed his example.

At frequent intervals the bar was entered by fresh customers, most of
them working men on their way home, who ordered and drank their pint or
half-pint of ale or porter and left at once.  Bundy began reading the
advertisement of the circus and menageries and a conversation ensued
concerning the wonderful performances of the trained animals. The Old
Dear said that some of them had as much sense as human beings, and the
manner with which he made this statement implied that he thought it was
a testimonial to the sagacity of the brutes.  He further said that he
had heard--a little earlier in the evening--a rumour that one of the
wild animals, a bear or something, had broken loose and was at present
at large.  This was what he had heard--he didn't know if it were true
or not.  For his own part he didn't believe it, and his hearers agreed
that it was highly improbable. Nobody ever knew how these silly yarns
got about.

Presently the Besotted Wretch got up and, taking the india-rubber rings
out of the net with a trembling hand, began throwing them one at a time
at the hooks on the board.  The rest of the company watched him with
much interest, laughing when he made a very bad shot and applauding
when he scored.

''E's a bit orf tonight,' remarked Philpot aside to Easton, 'but as a
rule 'e's a fair knockout at it.  Throws a splendid ring.'

The Semidrunk regarded the proceedings of the Besotted Wretch with an
expression of profound contempt.

'You can't play for nuts,' he said scornfully.

'Can't I?  I can play you, anyway.'

'Right you are!  I'll play you for drinks round!' cried the Semi-drunk.

For a moment the Besotted Wretch hesitated.  He had not money enough to
pay for drinks round.  However, feeling confident of winning, he
replied:

'Come on then.  What's it to be?  Fifty up?'

'Anything you like!  Fifty or a 'undred or a bloody million!'

'Better make it fifty for a start.'

'All right!'

'You play first if you like.'

'All right,' agreed the Semi-drunk, anxious to distinguish himself.
Holding the six rings in his left hand, the man stood in the middle of
the floor at a distance of about three yards from the board, with his
right foot advanced.  Taking one of the rings between the forefinger
and thumb of his right hand, and closing his left eye, he carefully
'sighted' the centre hook, No. 13; then he slowly extended his arm to
its full length in the direction of the board: then bending his elbow,
he brought his hand back again until it nearly touched his chin, and
slowly extended his arm again.  He repeated these movements several
times, whilst the others watched with bated breath.  Getting it right
at last he suddenly shot the ring at the board, but it did not go on
No. 13; it went over the partition into the private bar.

This feat was greeted with a roar of laughter.  The player stared at
the board in a dazed way, wondering what had become of the ring.  When
someone in the next bar threw it over the partition again, he realized
what had happened and, turning to the company with a sickly smile,
remarked:

'I ain't got properly used to this board yet: that's the reason of it.'

He now began throwing the other rings at the board rather wildly,
without troubling to take aim.  One struck the partition to the right
of the board: one to the left: one underneath: one went over the
counter, one on the floor, the other--the last--hit the board, and amid
a shout of applause, caught on the centre hook No. 13, the highest
number it was possible to score with a single throw.

'I shall be all right now that I've got the range,' observed the
Semi-drunk as he made way for his opponent.

'You'll see something now,' whispered Philpot to Easton. 'This bloke is
a dandy!'

The Besotted Wretch took up his position and with an affectation of
carelessness began throwing the rings.  It was really a remarkable
exhibition, for notwithstanding the fact that his hand trembled like
the proverbial aspen leaf, he succeeded in striking the board almost in
the centre every time; but somehow or other most of them failed to
catch on the hooks and fell into the net.  When he finished his
innings, he had only scored 4, two of the rings having caught on the
No. 2 hook.

''Ard lines,' remarked Bundy as he finished his beer and put the glass
down on the counter.

'Drink up and 'ave another,' said Easton as he drained his own glass.

'I don't mind if I do,' replied Crass, pouring what remained of the
pint down his throat.

Philpot's glass had been empty for some time.

'Same again,' said Easton, addressing the Old Dear and putting six
pennies on the counter.

By this time the Semi-drunk had again opened fire on the board, but he
seemed to have lost the range, for none of the rings scored.

They flew all over the place, and he finished his innings without
increasing his total.

The Besotted Wretch now sailed in and speedily piled up 37.  Then the
Semi-drunk had another go, and succeeded in getting 8.  His case
appeared hopeless, but his opponent in his next innings seemed to go
all to pieces.  Twice he missed the board altogether, and when he did
hit it he failed to score, until the very last throw, when he made 1.
Then the Semi-drunk went in again and got 10.

The scores were now:

        Besotted Wretch ........................ 42
        Semi-drunk ............................. 31

So far it was impossible to foresee the end.  It was anybody's game.
Crass became so excited that he absentmindedly opened his mouth and
shot his second pint down into his stomach with a single gulp, and
Bundy also drained his glass and called upon Philpot and Easton to
drink up and have another, which they accordingly did.

While the Semi-drunk was having his next innings, the Besotted Wretch
placed a penny on the counter and called for a half a pint, which he
drank in the hope of steadying his nerves for a great effort.  His
opponent meanwhile threw the rings at the board and missed it every
time, but all the same he scored, for one ring, after striking the
partition about a foot above the board, fell down and caught on the
hook.

The other man now began his innings, playing very carefully, and nearly
every ring scored. As he played, the others uttered exclamations of
admiration and called out the result of every throw.

'One!'

'One again!'

'Miss!  No!  Got 'im!  Two!'

'Miss!'

'Miss!'

'Four!'

The Semi-drunk accepted his defeat with a good grace, and after
explaining that he was a bit out of practice, placed a shilling on the
counter and invited the company to give their orders.  Everyone asked
for 'the same again,' but the landlord served Easton, Bundy and the
Besotted Wretch with pints instead of half-pints as before, so there
was no change out of the shilling.

'You know, there's a great deal in not bein' used to the board,' said
the Semi-drunk.

'There's no disgrace in bein' beat by a man like 'im, mate,' said
Philpot.  ''E's a champion!'

'Yes, there's no mistake about it.  'E throws a splendid ring!' said
Bundy.

This was the general verdict.  The Semi-drunk, though beaten, was not
disgraced: and he was so affected by the good feeling manifested by the
company that he presently produced a sixpence and insisted on paying
for another half-pint all round.

Crass had gone outside during this conversation, but he returned in a
few minutes.  'I feel a bit easier now,' he remarked with a laugh as he
took the half-pint glass that the Semi-drunk passed to him with a
shaking hand.  One after the other, within a few minutes, the rest
followed Crass's example, going outside and returning almost
immediately: and as Bundy, who was the last to return, came back he
exclaimed:

'Let's 'ave a game of shove-'a'penny.'

'All right,' said Easton, who was beginning to feel reckless.  'But
drink up first, and let's 'ave another.'

He had only sevenpence left, just enough to pay for another pint for
Crass and half a pint for everyone else.

The shove-ha'penny table was a planed mahogany board with a number of
parallel lines scored across it.  The game is played by placing the
coin at the end of the board--the rim slightly overhanging the
edge--and striking it with the back part of the palm of the hand,
regulating the force of the blow according to the distance it is
desired to drive the coin.

'What's become of Alf tonight?' inquired Philpot of the landlord whilst
Easton and Bundy were playing.  Alf was the barman.

''E's doing a bit of a job down in the cellar; some of the valves gone
a bit wrong.  But the missus is comin' down to lend me a hand
presently.  'Ere she is now.'

The landlady--who at this moment entered through the door at the back
of the bar--was a large woman with a highly- countenance and a
tremendous bust, incased in a black dress with a shot silk blouse. She
had several jewelled gold rings on the fingers of each fat white hand,
and a long gold watch guard hung round her fat neck.  She greeted Crass
and Philpot with condescension, smiling affably upon them.

Meantime the game of shove-ha'penny proceeded merrily, the Semi-drunk
taking a great interest in it and tendering advice to both players
impartially.  Bundy was badly beaten, and then Easton suggested that it
was time to think of going home.  This proposal--slightly modified--met
with general approval, the modification being suggested by Philpot, who
insisted on standing one final round of drinks before they went.

While they were pouring this down their throats, Crass took a penny
from his waistcoat pocket and put it in the slot of the polyphone. The
landlord put a fresh disc into it and wound it up and it began to play
'The Boys of the Bulldog Breed.'  The Semi-drunk happened to know the
words of the chorus of this song, and when he heard the music he
started unsteadily to his feet and with many fierce looks and gestures
began to roar at the top of his voice:

        'They may build their ships, my lads,
        And try to play the game,
        But they can't build the boys of the Bulldog breed,
        Wot made ole Hingland's--'

''Ere! Stop that, will yer?' cried the Old Dear, fiercely.  'I told you
once before that I don't allow that sort of thing in my 'ouse!'

The Semi-drunk stopped in confusion.

'I don't mean no 'arm,' he said unsteadily, appealing to the company.

'I don't want no chin from you!' said the Old Dear with a ferocious
scowl.  'If you want to make that row you can go somewheres else, and
the sooner you goes the better.  You've been 'ere long enough.'

This was true.  The man had been there long enough to spend every penny
he had been possessed of when he first came: he had no money left now,
a fact that the observant and experienced landlord had divined some
time ago.  He therefore wished to get rid of the fellow before the
drink affected him further and made him helplessly drunk. The
Semi-drunk listened with indignation and wrath to the landlord's
insulting words.

'I shall go when the bloody 'ell I like!' he shouted.  'I shan't ask
you nor nobody else!  Who the bloody 'ell are you?  You're nobody! See?
Nobody!  It's orf the likes of me that you gets your bloody livin'!  I
shall stop 'ere as long as I bloody well like, and if you don't like it
you can go to 'ell!'

'Oh!  Yer will, will yer?' said the Old Dear.  'We'll soon see about
that.'  And, opening the door at the back of the bar, he roared out:

'Alf!'

'Yes, sir,' replied a voice, evidently from the basement.

'Just come up 'ere.'

'All right,' replied the voice, and footsteps were heard ascending some
stairs.

'You'll see some fun in a minute,' gleefully remarked Crass to Easton.

The polyphone continued to play 'The Boys of the Bulldog Breed.'

Philpot crossed over to the Semi-drunk.  'Look 'ere, old man,' he
whispered, 'take my tip and go 'ome quietly.  You'll only git the worse
of it, you know.'

'Not me, mate,' replied the other, shaking his head doggedly.  ''Ere I
am, and 'ere I'm goin' to bloody well stop.'

'No, you ain't,' replied Philpot coaxingly. ''Look 'ere. I'll tell you
wot we'll do.  You 'ave just one more 'arf-pint along of me, and then
we'll both go 'ome together.  I'll see you safe 'ome.'

'See me safe 'ome! Wotcher mean?' indignantly demanded the other.  'Do
you think I'm drunk or wot?'

'No.  Certainly not,' replied Philpot, hastily.  'You're all right, as
right as I am myself.  But you know wot I mean.  Let's go 'ome.  You
don't want to stop 'ere all night, do you?'

By this time Alf had arrived at the door of the back of the bar.  He
was a burly young man about twenty-two or twenty-three years of age.

'Put it outside,' growled the landlord, indicating the culprit.

The barman instantly vaulted over the counter, and, having opened wide
the door leading into the street, he turned to the half-drunken man
and, jerking his thumb in the direction of the door, said:

'Are yer goin'?'

'I'm goin' to 'ave 'arf a pint along of this genelman first--'

'Yes.  It's all right,' said Philpot to the landlord.  'Let's 'ave two
'arf-pints, and say no more about it.'

'You mind your own business,' shouted the landlord, turning savagely on
him.  ''E'll get no more 'ere!  I don't want no drunken men in my
'ouse.  Who asked you to interfere?'

'Now then!' exclaimed the barman to the cause of the trouble, 'Outside!'

'Not me!' said the Semi-drunk firmly.  'Not before I've 'ad my 'arf--'

But before he could conclude, the barman had clutched him by the
collar, dragged him violently to the door and shot him into the middle
of the road, where he fell in a heap almost under the wheels of a
brewer's dray that happened to be passing.  This accomplished, Alf shut
the door and retired behind the counter again.

'Serve 'im bloody well right,' said Crass.

'I couldn't 'elp laughin' when I seen 'im go flyin' through the bloody
door,' said Bundy.

'You oughter 'ave more sense than to go interferin' like that,' said
Crass to Philpot.  'It was nothing to do with you.'

Philpot made no reply.  He was standing with his back to the others,
peeping out into the street over the top of the window casing.  Then he
opened the door and went out into the street.  Crass and the
others--through the window--watched him assist the Semi-drunk to his
feet and rub some of the dirt off his clothes, and presently after some
argument they saw the two go away together arm in arm.

Crass and the others laughed, and returned to their half-finished
drinks.

'Why, old Joe ain't drunk 'ardly 'arf of 'is!' cried Easton, seeing
Philpot's porter on the counter.  'Fancy going away like that!'

'More fool 'im,' growled Crass.  'There was no need for it: the man's
all right.'

The Besotted Wretch gulped his beer down as quickly as he could, with
his eyes fixed greedily on Philpot's glass. He had just finished his
own and was about to suggest that it was a pity to waste the porter
when Philpot unexpectedly reappeared.

'Hullo!  What 'ave you done with 'im?' inquired Crass.

'I think 'e'll be all right,' replied Philpot.  'He wouldn't let me go
no further with 'im: said if I didn't go away, 'e'd go for me!  But I
believe 'e'll be all right.  I think the fall sobered 'im a bit.'

'Oh, 'e's all right,' said Crass offhandedly.  'There's nothing the
matter with 'im.'

Philpot now drank his porter, and bidding 'good night' to the Old Dear,
the landlady and the Besotted Wretch, they all set out for home. As
they went along the dark and lonely thoroughfare that led over the hill
to Windley, they heard from time to time the weird roaring of the wild
animals in the menagerie that was encamped in the adjacent field. Just
as they reached a very gloomy and deserted part, they suddenly observed
a dark object in the middle of the road some distance in front of them.
It seemed to be a large animal of some kind and was coming slowly and
stealthily towards them.

They stopped, peering in a half-frightened way through the darkness.
The animal continued to approach.  Bundy stooped down to the ground,
groping about in search of a stone, and--with the exception of Crass,
who was too frightened to move--the others followed his example. They
found several large stones and stood waiting for the creature--whatever
it was--to come a little nearer so as to get a fair shot at it.  They
were about to let fly when the creature fell over on its side and
moaned as if in pain.  Observing this, the four men advanced cautiously
towards it.  Bundy struck a match and held it over the prostrate
figure.  It was the Semi-drunk.

After parting from Philpot, the poor wretch had managed to walk all
right for some distance.  As Philpot had remarked, the fall had to some
extent sobered him; but he had not gone very far before the drink he
had taken began to affect him again and he had fallen down. Finding it
impossible to get up, he began crawling along on his hands and knees,
unconscious of the fact that he was travelling in the wrong direction.
Even this mode of progression failed him at last, and he would probably
have been run over if they had not found him.  They raised him up, and
Philpot, exhorting him to 'pull himself together' inquired where he
lived.  The man had sense enough left to be able to tell them his
address, which was fortunately at Windley, where they all resided.

Bundy and Philpot took him home, separating from Crass and Easton at
the corner of the street where both the latter lived.

Crass felt very full and satisfied with himself. He had had six and a
half pints of beer, and had listened to two selections on the polyphone
at a total cost of one penny.

Easton had but a few yards to go before reaching his own house after
parting from Crass, but he paused directly he heard the latter's door
close, and leaning against a street lamp yielded to the feeling of
giddiness and nausea that he had been fighting against all the way
home.  All the inanimate objects around him seemed to be in motion. The
lights of the distant street lamps appeared to be floating about the
pavement and the roadway rose and fell like the surface of a troubled
sea.  He searched his pockets for his handkerchief and having found it
wiped his mouth, inwardly congratulating himself that Crass was not
there to see him.  Resuming his walk, after a few minutes he reached
his own home.  As he passed through, the gate closed of itself after
him, clanging loudly.  He went rather unsteadily up the narrow path
that led to his front door and entered.

The baby was asleep in the cradle.  Slyme had gone up to his own room,
and Ruth was sitting sewing by the fireside.  The table was still set
for two persons, for she had not yet taken her tea.

Easton lurched in noisily.  ''Ello, old girl!' he cried, throwing his
dinner basket carelessly on the floor with an affectation of joviality
and resting his hands on the table to support himself.  'I've come at
last, you see.'

Ruth left off sewing, and, letting her hands fall into her lap, sat
looking at him.  She had never seen him like this before.  His face was
ghastly pale, the eyes bloodshot and red-rimmed, the lips tremulous and
moist, and the ends of the hair of his fair moustache, stuck together
with saliva and stained with beer, hung untidily round his mouth in
damp clusters.

Perceiving that she did not speak or smile, Easton concluded that she
was angry and became grave himself.

'I've come at last, you see, my dear; better late than never.'

He found it very difficult to speak plainly, for his lips trembled and
refused to form the words.

'I don't know so much about that,' said Ruth, inclined to cry and
trying not to let him see the pity she could not help feeling for him.
'A nice state you're in.  You ought to be ashamed of yourself.'

Easton shook his head and laughed foolishly.  'Don't be angry, Ruth.
It's no good, you know.'

He walked clumsily towards her, still leaning on the table to steady
himself.

'Don't be angry,' he mumbled as he stooped over her, putting his arm
round her neck and his face close to hers.  'It's no good being angry,
you know, dear.'

She shrank away, shuddering with involuntary disgust as he pressed his
wet lips and filthy moustache upon her mouth.  His fetid breath, foul
with the smell of tobacco and beer, and the odour of the stale tobacco
smoke that exuded from his clothes filled her with loathing.  He kissed
her repeatedly and when at last he released her she hastily wiped her
face with her handkerchief and shivered.

Easton said he did not want any tea, and went upstairs to bed almost
immediately.  Ruth did not want any tea either now, although she had
been very hungry before he came home.  She sat up very late, sewing,
and when at length she did go upstairs she found him lying on his back,
partly undressed on the outside of the bedclothes, with his mouth wide
open, breathing stertorously.



Chapter 20

The Forty Thieves.  The Battle: Brigands versus Bandits


This is an even more unusually dull and uninteresting chapter, and
introduces several matters that may appear to have nothing to do with
the case.  The reader is nevertheless entreated to peruse it, because
it contains certain information necessary to an understanding of this
history.

The town of Mugsborough was governed by a set of individuals called the
Municipal Council.  Most of these 'representatives of the people' were
well-to-do or retired tradesmen.  In the opinion of the inhabitants of
Mugsborough, the fact that a man had succeeded in accumulating money in
business was a clear demonstration of his fitness to be entrusted with
the business of the town.

Consequently, when that very able and successful man of business Mr
George Rushton was put up for election to the Council he was returned
by a large majority of the votes of the working men who thought him an
ideal personage...

These Brigands did just as they pleased.  No one ever interfered with
them.  They never consulted the ratepayers in any way.  Even at
election time they did not trouble to hold meetings: each one of them
just issued a kind of manifesto setting forth his many noble qualities
and calling upon the people for their votes: and the latter never
failed to respond.  They elected the same old crew time after time...

The Brigands committed their depredations almost unhindered, for the
voters were engaged in the Battle of Life.  Take the public park for
instance.  Like so many swine around a trough--they were so busily
engaged in this battle that most of them had no time to go to the park,
or they might have noticed that there were not so many costly plants
there as there should have been.  And if they had inquired further they
would have discovered that nearly all the members of the Town Council
had very fine gardens.  There was reason for these gardens being so
grand, for the public park was systematically robbed of its best to
make them so.

There was a lake in the park where large numbers of ducks and geese
were kept at the ratepayers' expense.  In addition to the food provided
for these fowl with public money, visitors to the park used to bring
them bags of biscuits and bread crusts.  When the ducks and geese were
nicely fattened the Brigands used to carry them off and devour them at
home.  When they became tired of eating duck or goose, some of the
Councillors made arrangements with certain butchers and traded away the
birds for meat.

One of the most energetic members of the Band was Mr Jeremiah Didlum,
the house-furnisher, who did a large hire system trade.  He had an
extensive stock of second-hand furniture that he had resumed possession
of when the unfortunate would-be purchasers failed to pay the
instalments regularly.  Other of the second-hand things had been
purchased for a fraction of their real value at Sheriff's sales or from
people whom misfortune or want of employment had reduced to the
necessity of selling their household possessions.

Another notable member of the Band was Mr Amos Grinder, who had
practically monopolized the greengrocery trade and now owned nearly all
the fruiterers' shops in the town.  As for the other shops, if they did
not buy their stocks from him--or, rather, the company of which he was
managing director and principal shareholder--if these other fruiterers
and greengrocers did not buy their stuff from his company, he tried to
smash them by opening branches in their immediate neighbourhood and
selling below cost.  He was a self-made man: an example of what may be
accomplished by cunning and selfishness.

Then there was the Chief of the Band--Mr Adam Sweater, the Mayor.  He
was always the Chief, although he was not always Mayor, it being the
rule that the latter 'honour' should be enjoyed by all the members of
the Band in turn.  A bright 'honour', forsooth! to be the first citizen
in a community composed for the most part of ignorant semi-imbeciles,
slaves, slave-drivers and psalm-singing hypocrites. Mr Sweater was the
managing director and principal shareholder of a large drapery business
in which he had amassed a considerable fortune. This was not very
surprising, considering that he paid none of his workpeople fair wages
and many of them no wages at all.  He employed a great number of girls
and young women who were supposed to be learning dressmaking,
mantle-making or millinery.  These were all indentured apprentices,
some of whom had paid premiums of from five to ten pounds.  They were
'bound' for three years.  For the first two years they received no
wages: the third year they got a shilling or eightpence a week.  At the
end of the third year they usually got the sack, unless they were
willing to stay on as improvers at from three shillings to four and
sixpence per week.

They worked from half past eight in the morning till eight at night,
with an interval of an hour for dinner, and at half past four they
ceased work for fifteen minutes for tea.  This was provided by the
firm--half a pint for each girl, but they had to bring their own milk
and sugar and bread and butter.

Few of the girls ever learned their trades thoroughly.  Some were
taught to make sleeves; others cuffs or button-holes, and so on.  The
result was that in a short time each one became very expert and quick
at one thing; and although their proficiency in this one thing would
never enable them to earn a decent living, it enabled Mr Sweater to
make money during the period of their apprenticeship, and that was all
he cared about.

Occasionally a girl of intelligence and spirit would insist on the
fulfilment of the terms of her indentures, and sometimes the parents
would protest.  If this were persisted in those girls got on better:
but even these were turned to good account by the wily Sweater, who
induced the best of them to remain after their time was up by paying
them what appeared--by contrast with the others girls' money--good
wages, sometimes even seven or eight shillings a week! and liberal
promises of future advancement.  These girls then became a sort of
reserve who could be called up to crush any manifestation of discontent
on the part of the leading hands.

The greater number of the girls, however, submitted tamely to the
conditions imposed upon them.  They were too young to realize the wrong
that was being done them.  As for their parents, it never occurred to
them to doubt the sincerity of so good a man as Mr Sweater, who was
always prominent in every good and charitable work.

At the expiration of the girl's apprenticeship, if the parents
complained of her want of proficiency, the pious Sweater would
attribute it to idleness or incapacity, and as the people were
generally poor he seldom or never had any trouble with them.  This was
how he fulfilled the unctuous promise made to the confiding parents at
the time the girl was handed over to his tender mercy--that he would
'make a woman of her'.

This method of obtaining labour by false pretences and without payment,
which enabled him to produce costly articles for a mere fraction of the
price for which they were eventually sold, was adopted in other
departments of his business.  He procured shop assistants of both sexes
on the same terms.  A youth was indentured, usually for five years, to
be 'Made a Man of and 'Turned out fit to take a Position in any House'.
If possible, a premium, five, ten, or twenty pounds--according to their
circumstances--would be extracted from the parents.  For the first
three years, no wages: after that, perhaps two or three shillings a
week.

At the end of the five years the work of 'Making a Man of him' would be
completed.  Mr Sweater would then congratulate him and assure him that
he was qualified to assume a 'position' in any House but regret that
there was no longer any room for him in his.  Business was so bad.
Still, if the Man wished he might stay on until he secured a better
'position' and, as a matter of generosity, although he did not really
need the Man's services, he would pay him ten shillings per week!

Provided he was not addicted to drinking, smoking, gambling or the
Stock Exchange, or going to theatres, the young man's future was thus
assured.  Even if he were unsuccessful in his efforts to obtain another
position he could save a portion of his salary and eventually commence
business on his own account.

However, the branch of Mr Sweater's business to which it is desired to
especially direct the reader's attention was the Homeworkers
Department.  He employed a large number of women making ladies'
blouses, fancy aprons and children's pinafores.  Most of these articles
were disposed of wholesale in London and elsewhere, but some were
retailed at 'Sweaters' Emporium' in Mugsborough and at the firm's other
retail establishments throughout the county.  Many of the women workers
were widows with children, who were glad to obtain any employment that
did not take them away from their homes and families.

The blouses were paid for at the rate of from two shillings to five
shillings a dozen, the women having to provide their own machine and
cotton, besides calling for and delivering the work.  These poor women
were able to clear from six to eight shillings a week: and to earn even
that they had to work almost incessantly for fourteen or sixteen hours
a day.  There was no time for cooking and very little to cook, for they
lived principally on bread and margarine and tea.  Their homes were
squalid, their children half-starved and raggedly clothed in grotesque
garments hastily fashioned out of the cast-off clothes of charitable
neighbours.

But it was not in vain that these women toiled every weary day until
exhaustion compelled them to cease.  It was not in vain that they passed
their cheerless lives bending with aching shoulders over the thankless
work that barely brought them bread.  It was not in vain that they and
their children went famished and in rags, for after all, the principal
object of their labour was accomplished: the Good Cause was advanced.
Mr Sweater waxed rich and increased in goods and respectability.

Of course, none of those women were COMPELLED to engage in that
glorious cause.  No one is compelled to accept any particular set of
conditions in a free country like this.  Mr Trafaim--the manager of
Sweater's Homework Department--always put the matter before them in the
plainest, fairest possible way.  There was the work: that was the
figure!  And those who didn't like it could leave it.  There was no
compulsion.

Sometimes some perverse creature belonging to that numerous class who
are too lazy to work DID leave it!  But as the manager said, there were
plenty of others who were only too glad to take it.  In fact, such was
the enthusiasm amongst these women--especially such of them as had
little children to provide for--and such was their zeal for the Cause,
that some of them have been known to positively beg to be allowed to
work!

By these and similar means Adam Sweater had contrived to lay up for
himself a large amount of treasure upon earth, besides attaining
undoubted respectability; for that he was respectable no one
questioned.  He went to chapel twice every Sunday, his obese figure
arrayed in costly apparel, consisting--with other things--of grey
trousers, a long garment called a frock-coat, a tall silk hat, a
quantity of jewellery and a morocco-bound gilt-edged Bible.  He was an
official of some sort of the Shining Light Chapel.  His name appeared
in nearly every published list of charitable subscriptions.  No
starving wretch had ever appealed to him in vain for a penny soup
ticket.

Small wonder that when this good and public-spirited man offered his
services to the town--free of charge--the intelligent working men of
Mugsborough accepted his offer with enthusiastic applause.  The fact
that he had made money in business was a proof of his intellectual
capacity.  His much-advertised benevolence was a guarantee that his
abilities would be used to further not his own private interests, but
the interests of every section of the community, especially those of
the working classes, of whom the majority of his constituents was
composed.

As for the shopkeepers, they were all so absorbed in their own
business--so busily engaged chasing their employees, adding up their
accounts, and dressing themselves up in feeble imitation of the
'Haristocracy'--that they were incapable of taking a really intelligent
interest in anything else.  They thought of the Town Council as a kind
of Paradise reserved exclusively for jerry-builders and successful
tradesmen.  Possibly, some day, if they succeeded in making money, they
might become town councillors themselves! but in the meantime public
affairs were no particular concern of theirs.  So some of them voted
for Adam Sweater because he was a Liberal and some of them voted
against him for the same 'reason'.

Now and then, when details of some unusually scandalous proceeding of
the Council's leaked out, the townspeople--roused for a brief space
from their customary indifference--would discuss the matter in a
casual, half-indignant, half-amused, helpless sort of way; but always
as if it were something that did not directly concern them.  It was
during some such nine days' wonder that the title of 'The Forty
Thieves' was bestowed on the members of the Council by their
semi-imbecile constituents, who, not possessing sufficient intelligence
to devise means of punishing the culprits, affected to regard the
manoeuvres of the Brigands as a huge joke.

There was only one member of the Council who did not belong to the
Band--Councillor Weakling, a retired physician; but unfortunately he
also was a respectable man.  When he saw something going forwards that
he did not think was right, he protested and voted against it and
then--he collapsed!  There was nothing of the low agitator about HIM.
As for the Brigands, they laughed at his protests and his vote did not
matter.

With this one exception, the other members of the band were very
similar in character to Sweater, Rushton, Didlum and Grinder.  They had
all joined the Band with the same objects, self-glorification and the
advancement of their private interests.  These were the real reasons
why they besought the ratepayers to elect them to the Council, but of
course none of them ever admitted that such was the case.  No! When
these noble-minded altruists offered their services to the town they
asked the people to believe that they were actuated by a desire to give
their time and abilities for the purpose of furthering the interests of
Others, which was much the same as asking them to believe that it is
possible for the leopard to change his spots.



Owing to the extraordinary apathy of the other inhabitants, the
Brigands were able to carry out their depredations undisturbed.
Daylight robberies were of frequent occurrence.

For many years these Brigands had looked with greedy eyes upon the huge
profits of the Gas Company.  They thought it was a beastly shame that
those other bandits should be always raiding the town and getting clear
away with such rich spoils.

At length--about two years ago--after much study and many private
consultations, a plan of campaign was evolved; a secret council of war
was held, presided over by Mr Sweater, and the Brigands formed
themselves into an association called 'The Mugsborough Electric Light
Supply and Installation Coy. Ltd.', and bound themselves by a solemn
oath to do their best to drive the Gas Works Bandits out of the town
and to capture the spoils at present enjoyed by the latter for
themselves.

There was a large piece of ground, the property of the town, that was a
suitable site for the works; so in their character of directors of the
Electric Light Coy. they offered to buy this land from the
Municipality--or, in other words, from themselves--for about half its
value.

At the meeting of the Town Council when this offer was considered, all
the members present, with the solitary exception of Dr Weakling, being
shareholders in the newly formed company, Councillor Rushton moved a
resolution in favour of accepting it.  He said that every encouragement
should be given to the promoters of the Electric Light Coy., those
public-spirited citizens who had come forward and were willing to risk
their capital in an undertaking that would be a benefit to every class
of residents in the town that they all loved so well.  (Applause.)
There could be no doubt that the introduction of the electric light
would be a great addition to the attractions of Mugsborough, but there
was another and more urgent reason that disposed him to do whatever he
could to encourage the Company to proceed with this work.
Unfortunately, as was usual at that time of the year (Mr Rushton's
voice trembled with emotion) the town was full of unemployed.  (The
Mayor, Alderman Sweater, and all the other Councillors shook their
heads sadly; they were visibly affected.) There was no doubt that the
starting of that work at that time would be an inestimable boon to the
working-classes.  As the representative of a working-class ward he was
in favour of accepting the offer of the Company.  (Hear. Hear.)

Councillor Didlum seconded. In his opinion, it would be nothing short
of a crime to oppose anything that would provide work for the
unemployed.

Councillor Weakling moved that the offer be refused.  (Shame.)  He
admitted that the electric light would be an improvement to the town,
and in view of the existing distress he would be glad to see the work
started, but the price mentioned was altogether too low.  It was not
more than half the value of the land.  (Derisive laughter.)

Councillor Grinder said he was astonished at the attitude taken up by
Councillor Weakling.  In his (Grinder's) opinion it was disgraceful
that a member of the council should deliberately try to wreck a project
which would do so much towards relieving the unemployed.

The Mayor, Alderman Sweater, said that he could not allow the amendment
to be discussed until it was seconded: if there were no seconder he
would put the original motion.

There was no seconder, because everyone except Weakling was in favour
of the resolution, which was carried amid loud cheers, and the
representatives of the ratepayers proceeded to the consideration of the
next business.

Councillor Didlum proposed that the duty on all coal brought into the
borough be raised from two shillings to three shillings per ton.

Councillor Rushton seconded.  The largest consumer of coal was the Gas
Coy., and, considering the great profits made by that company, they
were quite justified in increasing the duty to the highest figure the
Act permitted.

After a feeble protest from Weakling, who said it would only increase
the price of gas and coal without interfering with the profits of the
Gas Coy., this was also carried, and after some other business had been
transacted, the Band dispersed.

That meeting was held two years ago, and since that time the Electric
Light Works had been built and the war against the gasworks carried on
vigorously.  After several encounters, in which they lost a few
customers and a portion of the public lighting, the Gasworks Bandits
retreated out of the town and entrenched themselves in a strong
position beyond the borough boundary, where they erected a number of
gasometers.  They were thus enabled to pour gas into the town at long
range without having to pay the coal dues.

This masterly stratagem created something like a panic in the ranks of
the Forty Thieves.  At the end of two years they found themselves
exhausted with the protracted campaign, their movements hampered by a
lot of worn-out plant and antiquated machinery, and harassed on every
side by the lower charges of the Gas Coy.  They were reluctantly
constrained to admit that the attempt to undermine the Gasworks was a
melancholy failure, and that the Mugsborough Electric Light and
Installation Coy. was a veritable white elephant.  They began to ask
themselves what they should do with it; and some of them even urged
unconditional surrender, or an appeal to the arbitration of the
Bankruptcy Court.

In the midst of all the confusion and demoralization there was,
however, one man who did not lose his presence of mind, who in this
dark hour of disaster remained calm and immovable, and like a vast
mountain of flesh reared his head above the storm, whose mighty
intellect perceived a way to turn this apparently hopeless defeat into
a glorious victory.  That man was Adam Sweater, the Chief of the Band.



Chapter 21

The Reign of Terror.  The Great Money Trick


During the next four weeks the usual reign of terror continued at 'The
Cave'.  The men slaved like so many convicts under the vigilant
surveillance of Crass, Misery and Rushton.  No one felt free from
observation for a single moment.  It happened frequently that a man who
was working alone--as he thought--on turning round would find Hunter or
Rushton standing behind him: or one would look up from his work to
catch sight of a face watching him through a door or a window or over
the banisters.  If they happened to be working in a room on the ground
floor, or at a window on any floor, they knew that both Rushton and
Hunter were in the habit of hiding among the trees that surrounded the
house, and spying upon them thus.

There was a plumber working outside repairing the guttering that ran
round the bottom edge of the roof.  This poor wretch's life was a
perfect misery: he fancied he saw Hunter or Rushton in every bush.  He
had two ladders to work from, and since these ladders had been in use
Misery had thought of a new way of spying on the men.  Finding that he
never succeeded in catching anyone doing anything wrong when he entered
the house by one of the doors, Misery adopted the plan of crawling up
one of the ladders, getting in through one of the upper windows and
creeping softly downstairs and in and out of the rooms. Even then he
never caught anyone, but that did not matter, for he accomplished his
principal purpose--every man seemed afraid to cease working for even an
instant.

The result of all this was, of course, that the work progressed rapidly
towards completion.  The hands grumbled and cursed, but all the same
every man tore into it for all he was worth.  Although he did next to
nothing himself, Crass watched and urged on the others.  He was 'in
charge of the job': he knew that unless he succeeded in making this
work pay he would not be put in charge of another job.  On the other
hand, if he did make it pay he would be given the preference over
others and be kept on as long as the firm had any work.  The firm would
give him the preference only as long as it paid them to do so.

As for the hands, each man knew that there was no chance of obtaining
work anywhere else at present; there were dozens of men out of
employment already. Besides, even if there had been a chance of getting
another job somewhere else, they knew that the conditions were more or
less the same on every firm.  Some were even worse than this one. Each
man knew that unless he did as much as ever he could, Crass would
report him for being slow.  They knew also that when the job began to
draw to a close the number of men employed upon it would be reduced,
and when that time came the hands who did the most work would be kept
on and the slower ones discharged.  It was therefore in the hope of
being one of the favoured few that while inwardly cursing the rest for
'tearing into it', everyone as a matter of self-preservation went and
'tore into it' themselves.

They all cursed Crass, but most of them would have been very glad to
change places with him: and if any one of them had been in his place
they would have been compelled to act in the same way--or lose the job.

They all reviled Hunter, but most of them would have been glad to
change places with him also: and if any one of them had been in his
place they would have been compelled to do the same things, or lose the
job.

They all hated and blamed Rushton.  Yet if they had been in Rushton's
place they would have been compelled to adopt the same methods, or
become bankrupt: for it is obvious that the only way to compete
successfully against other employers who are sweaters is to be a
sweater yourself.  Therefore no one who is an upholder of the present
system can consistently blame any of these men.  Blame the system.

If you, reader, had been one of the hands, would you have slogged?  Or
would you have preferred to starve and see your family starve?  If you
had been in Crass's place, would you have resigned rather than do such
dirty work?  If you had had Hunter's berth, would you have given it up
and voluntarily reduced yourself to the level of the hands?  If you had
been Rushton, would you rather have become bankrupt than treat your
'hands' and your customers in the same way as your competitors treated
theirs?  It may be that, so placed, you--being the noble-minded paragon
that you are--would have behaved unselfishly. But no one has any right
to expect you to sacrifice yourself for the benefit of other people who
would only call you a fool for your pains. It may be true that if any
one of the hands--Owen, for instance--had been an employer of labour,
he would have done the same as other employers.  Some people seem to
think that proves that the present system is all right!  But really it
only proves that the present system compels selfishness.  One must
either trample upon others or be trampled upon oneself.  Happiness
might be possible if everyone were unselfish; if everyone thought of
the welfare of his neighbour before thinking of his own.  But as there
is only a very small percentage of such unselfish people in the world,
the present system has made the earth into a sort of hell.  Under the
present system there is not sufficient of anything for everyone to have
enough.  Consequently there is a fight--called by Christians the
'Battle of Life'.  In this fight some get more than they need, some
barely enough, some very little, and some none at all.  The more
aggressive, cunning, unfeeling and selfish you are the better it will
be for you.  As long as this 'Battle of Life' System endures, we have
no right to blame other people for doing the same things that we are
ourselves compelled to do.  Blame the system.

But that IS just what the hands did not do.  They blamed each other;
they blamed Crass, and Hunter, and Rushton, but with the Great System
of which they were all more or less the victims they were quite
content, being persuaded that it was the only one possible and the best
that human wisdom could devise.  The reason why they all believed this
was because not one of them had ever troubled to inquire whether it
would not be possible to order things differently.  They were content
with the present system.  If they had not been content they would have
been anxious to find some way to alter it.  But they had never taken
the trouble to seriously inquire whether it was possible to find some
better way, and although they all knew in a hazy fashion that other
methods of managing the affairs of the world had already been proposed,
they neglected to inquire whether these other methods were possible or
practicable, and they were ready and willing to oppose with ignorant
ridicule or brutal force any man who was foolish or quixotic enough to
try to explain to them the details of what he thought was a better way.
They accepted the present system in the same way as they accepted the
alternating seasons.  They knew that there was spring and summer and
autumn and winter.  As to how these different seasons came to be, or
what caused them, they hadn't the remotest notion, and it is extremely
doubtful whether the question had ever occurred to any of them: but
there is no doubt whatever about the fact that none of them knew.  From
their infancy they had been trained to distrust their own intelligence,
and to leave the management of the affairs of the world--and for that
matter of the next world too--to their betters; and now most of them
were absolutely incapable of thinking of any abstract subject whatever.
Nearly all their betters--that is, the people who do nothing--were
unanimous in agreeing that the present system is a very good one and
that it is impossible to alter or improve it.  Therefore Crass and his
mates, although they knew nothing whatever about it themselves,
accepted it as an established, incontrovertible fact that the existing
state of things is immutable.  They believed it because someone else
told them so. They would have believed anything: on one
condition--namely, that they were told to believe it by their betters.
They said it was surely not for the Like of Them to think that they
knew better than those who were more educated and had plenty of time to
study.

As the work in the drawing-room proceeded, Crass abandoned the hope
that Owen was going to make a mess of it.  Some of the rooms upstairs
being now ready for papering, Slyme was started on that work, Bert
being taken away from Owen to assist Slyme as paste boy, and it was
arranged that Crass should help Owen whenever he needed someone to lend
him a hand.

Sweater came frequently during these four weeks, being interested in
the progress of the work.  On these occasions Crass always managed to
be present in the drawing-room and did most of the talking.  Owen was
very satisfied with this arrangement, for he was always ill at ease
when conversing with a man like Sweater, who spoke in an offensively
patronizing way and expected common people to kowtow to and 'Sir' him
at every second word.  Crass however, seemed to enjoy doing that kind
of thing.  He did not exactly grovel on the floor, when Sweater spoke
to him, but he contrived to convey the impression that he was willing
to do so if desired.

Outside the house Bundy and his mates had dug deep trenches in the damp
ground in which they were laying new drains.  This work, like that of
the painting of the inside of the house, was nearly completed. It was a
miserable job.  Owing to the fact that there had been a spell of bad
weather the ground was sodden with rain and there was mud everywhere,
the men's clothing and boots being caked with it.  But the worst thing
about the job was the smell.  For years the old drain-pipes had been
defective and leaky.  The ground a few feet below the surface was
saturated with fetid moisture and a stench as of a thousand putrefying
corpse emanated from the opened earth.  The clothing of the men who
were working in the trenches became saturated with this fearful odour,
and for that matter, so did the men themselves.

They said they could smell and taste it all the time, even when they
were away from the work at home, and when they were at meals. Although
they smoked their pipes all the time they were at work, Misery having
ungraciously given them permission, several times Bundy and one or
other of his mates were attacked with fits of vomiting.

But, as they began to realize that the finish of the job was in sight,
a kind of panic seized upon the hands, especially those who had been
taken on last and who would therefore be the first to be 'stood still'.
Easton, however, felt pretty confident that Crass would do his best to
get him kept on till the end of the job, for they had become quite
chummy lately, usually spending a few evenings together at the
Cricketers every week.

'There'll be a bloody slaughter 'ere soon,' remarked Harlow to Philpot
one day as they were painting the banisters of the staircase.  'I
reckon next week will about finish the inside.'

'And the outside ain't goin' to take very long, you know,' replied
Philpot.

'They ain't got no other work in, have they?'

'Not that I knows of,' replied Philpot gloomily; 'and I don't think
anyone else has either.'

'You know that little place they call the "Kiosk" down the Grand
Parade, near the bandstand,' asked Harlow after a pause.

'Where they used to sell refreshments?'

'Yes; it belongs to the Corporation, you know.'

'It's been closed up lately, ain't it?'

'Yes; the people who 'ad it couldn't make it pay; but I 'eard last
night that Grinder the fruit-merchant is goin' to open it again.  If
it's true, there'll be a bit of a job there for someone, because it'll
'ave to be done up.'

'Well, I hope it does come orf replied Philpot.  'It'll be a job for
some poor b--rs.'

'I wonder if they've started anyone yet on the venetian blinds for this
'ouse?' remarked Easton after a pause.

'I don't know,' replied Philpot.

They relapsed into silence for a while.

'I wonder what time it is?' said Philpot at length.  'I don't know 'ow
you feel, but I begin to want my dinner.'

'That's just what I was thinking; it can't be very far off it now. It's
nearly 'arf an hour since Bert went down to make the tea.  It seems a
'ell of a long morning to me.'

'So it does to me,' said Philpot;  'slip upstairs and ask Slyme what
time it is.'

Harlow laid his brush across the top of his paint-pot and went
upstairs.  He was wearing a pair of cloth slippers, and walked softly,
not wishing that Crass should hear him leaving his work, so it happened
that without any intention of spying on Slyme, Harlow reached the door
of the room in which the former was working without being heard and,
entering suddenly, surprised Slyme--who was standing near the
fireplace--in the act of breaking a whole roll of wallpaper across his
knee as one might break a stick.  On the floor beside him was what had
been another roll, now broken into two pieces.  When Harlow came in,
Slyme started, and his face became crimson with confusion.  He hastily
gathered the broken rolls together and, stooping down, thrust the
pieces up the flue of the grate and closed the register.

'Wot's the bloody game?' inquired Harlow.

Slyme laughed with an affectation of carelessness, but his hands
trembled and his face was now very pale.

'We must get our own back somehow, you know, Fred,' he said.

Harlow did not reply.  He did not understand.  After puzzling over it
for a few minutes, he gave it up.

'What's the time?' he asked.

'Fifteen minutes to twelve,' said Slyme and added, as Harlow was going
away: 'Don't mention anything about that paper to Crass or any of the
others.'

'I shan't say nothing,' replied Harlow.

Gradually, as he pondered over it, Harlow began to comprehend the
meaning of the destruction of the two rolls of paper.  Slyme was doing
the paperhanging piecework--so much for each roll hung.  Four of the
rooms upstairs had been done with the same pattern, and Hunter--who was
not over-skilful in such matters--had evidently sent more paper than
was necessary.  By getting rid of these two rolls, Slyme would be able
to make it appear that he had hung two rolls more than was really the
case.  He had broken the rolls so as to be able to take them away from
the house without being detected, and he had hidden them up the chimney
until he got an opportunity of so doing.  Harlow had just arrived at
this solution of the problem when, hearing the lower flight of stairs
creaking, he peeped over and observed Misery crawling up. He had come
to see if anyone had stopped work before the proper time. Passing the
two workmen without speaking, he ascended to the next floor, and
entered the room where Slyme was.

'You'd better not do this room yet,' said Hunter.  'There's to be a new
grate and mantelpiece put in.'

He crossed over to the fireplace and stood looking at it thoughtfully
for a few minutes.

'It's not a bad little grate, you know, is it?' he remarked.  'We'll be
able to use it somewhere or other.'

'Yes; it's all right,' said Slyme, whose heart was beating like a
steam-hammer.

'Do for a front room in a cottage,' continued Misery, stooping down to
examine it more closely.  'There's nothing broke that I can see.'

He put his hand against the register and vainly tried to push it open.
'H'm, there's something wrong 'ere,' he remarked, pushing harder.

'Most likely a brick or some plaster fallen down,' gasped Slyme, coming
to Misery's assistance.  'Shall I try to open it?'

'Don't trouble,' replied Nimrod, rising to his feet.  'It's most likely
what you say.  I'll see that the new grate is sent up after dinner.
Bundy can fix it this afternoon and then you can go on papering as soon
as you like.'

With this, Misery went out of the room, downstairs and away from the
house, and Slyme wiped the sweat from his forehead with his
handkerchief.  Then he knelt down and, opening the register, he took
out the broken rolls of paper and hid them up the chimney of the next
room.  While he was doing this the sound of Crass's whistle shrilled
through the house.

'Thank Gord!' exclaimed Philpot fervently as he laid his brushes on the
top of his pot and joined in the general rush to the kitchen.  The
scene here is already familiar to the reader.  For seats, the two pairs
of steps laid on their sides parallel to each other, about eight feet
apart and at right angles to the fireplace, with the long plank placed
across; and the upturned pails and the drawers of the dresser. The
floor unswept and littered with dirt, scraps of paper, bits of plaster,
pieces of lead pipe and dried mud; and in the midst, the steaming
bucket of stewed tea and the collection of cracked cups, jam-jam and
condensed milk tins.  And on the seats the men in their shabby and in
some cases ragged clothing sitting and eating their coarse food and
cracking jokes.

It was a pathetic and wonderful and at the same time a despicable
spectacle.  Pathetic that human beings should be condemned to spend the
greater part of their lives amid such surroundings, because it must be
remembered that most of their time was spent on some job or other.
When 'The Cave' was finished they would go to some similar 'job', if
they were lucky enough to find one.  Wonderful, because although they
knew that they did more than their fair share of the great work of
producing the necessaries and comforts of life, they did not think they
were entitled to a fair share of the good things they helped to create!
And despicable, because although they saw their children condemned to
the same life of degradation, hard labour and privation, yet they
refused to help to bring about a better state of affairs.  Most of them
thought that what had been good enough for themselves was good enough
for their children.

It seemed as if they regarded their own children with a kind of
contempt, as being only fit to grow up to be the servants of the
children of such people as Rushton and Sweater.  But it must be
remembered that they had been taught self-contempt when they were
children.  In the so-called 'Christian' schools they attended then
they were taught to 'order themselves lowly and reverently towards
their betters', and they were now actually sending their own children
to learn the same degrading lessons in their turn!  They had a vast
amount of consideration for their betters, and for the children of
their betters, but very little for their own children, for each other,
or for themselves.

That was why they sat there in their rags and ate their coarse food,
and cracked their coarser jokes, and drank the dreadful tea, and were
content!  So long as they had Plenty of Work and plenty
of--Something--to eat, and somebody else's cast-off clothes to wear,
they were content!  And they were proud of it.  They gloried in it.
They agreed and assured each other that the good things of life were
not intended for the 'Likes of them', or their children.

'Wot's become of the Professor?' asked the gentleman who sat on the
upturned pail in the corner, referring to Owen, who had not yet come
down from his work.

'P'raps 'e's preparing 'is sermon,' remarked Harlow with a laugh.

'We ain't 'ad no lectures from 'im lately, since 'e's been on that
room,' observed Easton.  ''Ave we?'

'Dam good job too!' exclaimed Sawkins.  'It gives me the pip to 'ear
'im, the same old thing over and over again.'

'Poor ole Frank,' remarked Harlow.  ''E does upset 'isself about
things, don't 'e?'

'More fool 'im!' said Bundy.  'I'll take bloody good care I don't go
worryin' myself to death like 'e's doin', about such dam rot as that.'

'I do believe that's wot makes 'im look so bad as 'e does,' observed
Harlow.  'Several times this morning I couldn't help noticing the way
'e kept on coughing.'

'I thought 'e seemed to be a bit better lately,' Philpot observed;
'more cheerful and happier like, and more inclined for a bit of fun.'

'He's a funny sort of chap, ain't he?' said Bundy.  'One day quite
jolly, singing and cracking jokes and tellin' yarns, and the next you
can't hardly get a word out of 'im.'

'Bloody rot, I call it,' chimed in the man on the pail.  'Wot the
'ell's the use of the likes of us troublin' our 'eads about politics?'

'Oh, I don't see that.' replied Harlow.  'We've got votes and we're
really the people what control the affairs of the country, so I reckon
we ought to take SOME interest in it, but at the same time I can't see
no sense in this 'ere Socialist wangle that Owen's always talkin'
about.'

'Nor nobody else neither,' said Crass with a jeering laugh.

'Even if all the bloody money in the world WAS divided out equal,' said
the man on the pail, profoundly, 'it wouldn't do no good!  In six
months' time it would be all back in the same 'ands again.'

'Of course,' said everybody.

'But 'e 'ad a cuff the other day about money bein' no good at all!'
observed Easton.  'Don't you remember 'e said as money was the
principal cause of poverty?'

'So it is the principal cause of poverty,' said Owen, who entered at
that moment.

'Hooray!' shouted Philpot, leading off a cheer which the others took
up.  'The Professor 'as arrived and will now proceed to say a few
remarks.'

A roar of merriment greeted this sally.

'Let's 'ave our bloody dinner first, for Christ's sake,' appealed
Harlow, with mock despair.

As Owen, having filled his cup with tea, sat down in his usual place,
Philpot rose solemnly to his feet, and, looking round the company, said:

'Genelmen, with your kind permission, as soon as the Professor 'as
finished 'is dinner 'e will deliver 'is well-known lecture, entitled,
"Money the Principal Cause of being 'ard up", proving as money ain't no
good to nobody.  At the hend of the lecture a collection will be took
up to provide the lecturer with a little encouragement.'  Philpot
resumed his seat amid cheers.

As soon as they had finished eating, some of the men began to make
remarks about the lecture, but Owen only laughed and went on reading
the piece of newspaper that his dinner had been wrapped in.  Usually
most of the men went out for a walk after dinner, but as it happened to
be raining that day they were determined, if possible, to make Owen
fulfill the engagement made in his name by Philpot.

'Let's 'oot 'im,' said Harlow, and the suggestion was at once acted
upon; howls, groans and catcalls filled the air, mingled with cries of
'Fraud!' 'Imposter!' 'Give us our money back!' 'Let's wreck the 'all!'
and so on.

'Come on 'ere,' cried Philpot, putting his hand on Owen's shoulder.
'Prove that money is the cause of poverty.'

'It's one thing to say it and another to prove it,' sneered Crass, who
was anxious for an opportunity to produce the long-deferred Obscurer
cutting.

'Money IS the real cause of poverty,' said Owen.

'Prove it,' repeated Crass.

'Money is the cause of poverty because it is the device by which those
who are too lazy to work are enabled to rob the workers of the fruits
of their labours.'

'Prove it,' said Crass.

Owen slowly folded up the piece of newspaper he had been reading and
put it into his pocket.

'All right,' he replied.  'I'll show you how the Great Money Trick is
worked.'

Owen opened his dinner basket and took from it two slices of bread but
as these were not sufficient, he requested that anyone who had some
bread left would give it to him.  They gave him several pieces, which
he placed in a heap on a clean piece of paper, and, having borrowed the
pocket knives they used to cut and eat their dinners with from Easton,
Harlow and Philpot, he addressed them as follows:

'These pieces of bread represent the raw materials which exist
naturally in and on the earth for the use of mankind; they were not
made by any human being, but were created by the Great Spirit for the
benefit and sustenance of all, the same as were the air and the light
of the sun.'

'You're about as fair-speakin' a man as I've met for some time,' said
Harlow, winking at the others.

'Yes, mate,' said Philpot.  'Anyone would agree to that much! It's as
clear as mud.'

'Now,' continued Owen, 'I am a capitalist; or, rather, I represent the
landlord and capitalist class.  That is to say, all these raw materials
belong to me.  It does not matter for our present argument how I
obtained possession of them, or whether I have any real right to them;
the only thing that matters now is the admitted fact that all the raw
materials which are necessary for the production of the necessaries of
life are now the property of the Landlord and Capitalist class.  I am
that class: all these raw materials belong to me.'

'Good enough!' agreed Philpot.

'Now you three represent the Working class: you have nothing--and for
my part, although I have all these raw materials, they are of no use to
me--what I need is--the things that can be made out of these raw
materials by Work: but as I am too lazy to work myself, I have invented
the Money Trick to make you work FOR me.  But first I must explain that
I possess something else beside the raw materials.  These three knives
represent--all the machinery of production; the factories, tools,
railways, and so forth, without which the necessaries of life cannot be
produced in abundance.  And these three coins'--taking three
halfpennies from his pocket--'represent my Money Capital.'

'But before we go any further,' said Owen, interrupting himself, 'it is
most important that you remember that I am not supposed to be merely
"a" capitalist.  I represent the whole Capitalist Class.  You are not
supposed to be just three workers--you represent the whole Working
Class.'

'All right, all right,' said Crass, impatiently, 'we all understand
that.  Git on with it.'

Owen proceeded to cut up one of the slices of bread into a number of
little square blocks.

'These represent the things which are produced by labour, aided by
machinery, from the raw materials.  We will suppose that three of these
blocks represent--a week's work.  We will suppose that a week's work is
worth--one pound: and we will suppose that each of these ha'pennies is
a sovereign.  We'd be able to do the trick better if we had real
sovereigns, but I forgot to bring any with me.'

'I'd lend you some,' said Philpot, regretfully, 'but I left me purse on
our grand pianner.'

As by a strange coincidence nobody happened to have any gold with them,
it was decided to make shift with the halfpence.

'Now this is the way the trick works--'

'Before you goes on with it,' interrupted Philpot, apprehensively,
'don't you think we'd better 'ave someone to keep watch at the gate in
case a Slop comes along?  We don't want to get runned in, you know.'

'I don't think there's any need for that,' replied Owen, 'there's only
one slop who'd interfere with us for playing this game, and that's
Police Constable Socialism.'

'Never mind about Socialism,' said Crass, irritably.  'Get along with
the bloody trick.'

Owen now addressed himself to the working classes as represented by
Philpot, Harlow and Easton.

'You say that you are all in need of employment, and as I am the
kind-hearted capitalist class I am going to invest all my money in
various industries, so as to give you Plenty of Work.  I shall pay each
of you one pound per week, and a week's work is--you must each produce
three of these square blocks.  For doing this work you will each
receive your wages; the money will be your own, to do as you like with,
and the things you produce will of course be mine, to do as I like
with.  You will each take one of these machines and as soon as you have
done a week's work, you shall have your money.'

The Working Classes accordingly set to work, and the Capitalist class
sat down and watched them.  As soon as they had finished, they passed
the nine little blocks to Owen, who placed them on a piece of paper by
his side and paid the workers their wages.

'These blocks represent the necessaries of life.  You can't live
without some of these things, but as they belong to me, you will have
to buy them from me: my price for these blocks is--one pound each.'

As the working classes were in need of the necessaries of life and as
they could not eat, drink or wear the useless money, they were
compelled to agree to the kind Capitalist's terms.  They each bought
back and at once consumed one-third of the produce of their labour. The
capitalist class also devoured two of the square blocks, and so the net
result of the week's work was that the kind capitalist had consumed two
pounds worth of the things produced by the labour of the others, and
reckoning the squares at their market value of one pound each, he had
more than doubled his capital, for he still possessed the three pounds
in money and in addition four pounds worth of goods.  As for the
working classes, Philpot, Harlow and Easton, having each consumed the
pound's worth of necessaries they had bought with their wages, they
were again in precisely the same condition as when they started
work--they had nothing.

This process was repeated several times: for each week's work the
producers were paid their wages.  They kept on working and spending all
their earnings.  The kind-hearted capitalist consumed twice as much as
any one of them and his pile of wealth continually increased. In a
little while--reckoning the little squares at their market value of one
pound each--he was worth about one hundred pounds, and the working
classes were still in the same condition as when they began, and were
still tearing into their work as if their lives depended upon it.

After a while the rest of the crowd began to laugh, and their merriment
increased when the kind-hearted capitalist, just after having sold a
pound's worth of necessaries to each of his workers, suddenly took
their tools--the Machinery of Production--the knives away from them,
and informed them that as owing to Over Production all his store-houses
were glutted with the necessaries of life, he had decided to close down
the works.

'Well, and wot the bloody 'ell are we to do now?' demanded Philpot.

'That's not my business,' replied the kind-hearted capitalist.  'I've
paid you your wages, and provided you with Plenty of Work for a long
time past.  I have no more work for you to do at present.  Come round
again in a few months' time and I'll see what I can do for you.'

'But what about the necessaries of life?' demanded Harlow.  'We must
have something to eat.'

'Of course you must,' replied the capitalist, affably; 'and I shall be
very pleased to sell you some.'

'But we ain't got no bloody money!'

'Well, you can't expect me to give you my goods for nothing!  You
didn't work for me for nothing, you know.  I paid you for your work and
you should have saved something: you should have been thrifty like me.
Look how I have got on by being thrifty!'

The unemployed looked blankly at each other, but the rest of the crowd
only laughed; and then the three unemployed began to abuse the
kind-hearted Capitalist, demanding that he should give them some of the
necessaries of life that he had piled up in his warehouses, or to be
allowed to work and produce some more for their own needs; and even
threatened to take some of the things by force if he did not comply
with their demands.  But the kind-hearted Capitalist told them not to
be insolent, and spoke to them about honesty, and said if they were not
careful he would have their faces battered in for them by the police,
or if necessary he would call out the military and have them shot down
like dogs, the same as he had done before at Featherstone and Belfast.

'Of course,' continued the kind-hearted capitalist, 'if it were not for
foreign competition I should be able to sell these things that you have
made, and then I should be able to give you Plenty of Work again: but
until I have sold them to somebody or other, or until I have used them
myself, you will have to remain idle.'

'Well, this takes the bloody biskit, don't it?' said Harlow.

'The only thing as I can see for it,' said Philpot mournfully, 'is to
'ave a unemployed procession.'

'That's the idear,' said Harlow, and the three began to march about the
room in Indian file, singing:

        'We've got no work to do-oo-oo'
        We've got no work to do-oo-oo!
        Just because we've been workin' a dam sight too hard,
        Now we've got no work to do.'

As they marched round, the crowd jeered at them and made offensive
remarks.  Crass said that anyone could see that they were a lot of
lazy, drunken loafers who had never done a fair day's work in their
lives and never intended to.

'We shan't never get nothing like this, you know,' said Philpot. 'Let's
try the religious dodge.'

'All right,' agreed Harlow.  'What shall we give 'em?'

'I know!' cried Philpot after a moment's deliberation.  '"Let my lower
lights be burning."  That always makes 'em part up.'

The three unemployed accordingly resumed their march round the room,
singing mournfully and imitating the usual whine of street-singers:

        'Trim your fee-bil lamp me brither-in,
        Some poor sail-er tempest torst,
        Strugglin' 'ard to save the 'arb-er,
        Hin the dark-niss may be lorst,
        So let try lower lights be burning,
        Send 'er gleam acrost the wave,
        Some poor shipwrecked, struggling seaman,
        You may rescue, you may save.'

'Kind frens,' said Philpot, removing his cap and addressing the crowd,
'we're hall honest British workin' men, but we've been hout of work for
the last twenty years on account of foreign competition and
over-production.  We don't come hout 'ere because we're too lazy to
work; it's because we can't get a job.  If it wasn't for foreign
competition, the kind'earted Hinglish capitalists would be able to sell
their goods and give us Plenty of Work, and if they could, I assure you
that we should hall be perfectly willing and contented to go on workin'
our bloody guts out for the benefit of our masters for the rest of our
lives.  We're quite willin' to work: that's hall we arst for--Plenty of
Work--but as we can't get it we're forced to come out 'ere and arst you
to spare a few coppers towards a crust of bread and a night's lodgin'.'

As Philpot held out his cap for subscriptions, some of them attempted
to expectorate into it, but the more charitable put in pieces of cinder
or dirt from the floor, and the kind-hearted capitalist was so affected
by the sight of their misery that he gave them one of the sovereigns he
had in us pocket: but as this was of no use to them they immediately
returned it to him in exchange for one of the small squares of the
necessaries of life, which they divided and greedily devoured.  And
when they had finished eating they gathered round the philanthropist
and sang, 'For he's a jolly good fellow,' and afterwards Harlow
suggested that they should ask him if he would allow them to elect him
to Parliament.



Chapter 22

The Phrenologist


The following morning--Saturday--the men went about their work in
gloomy silence; there were but few attempts at conversation and no
jests or singing.  The tenor of the impending slaughter pervaded the
house.  Even those who were confident of being spared and kept on till
the job was finished shared the general depression, not only out of
sympathy for the doomed, but because they knew that a similar fate
awaited themselves a little later on.

They all waited anxiously for Nimrod to come, but hour after hour
dragged slowly by and he did not arrive.  At half past eleven some of
those who had made up their minds that they were to be 'stood still'
began to hope that the slaughter was to be deferred for a few days:
after all, there was plenty of work still to be done: even if all hands
were kept on, the job could scarcely be finished in another week.
Anyhow, it would not be very long now before they would know one way or
the other.  If he did not come before twelve, it was all right: all the
hands were paid by the hour and were therefore entitled to an hour's
notice.

Easton and Harlow were working together on the staircase, finishing the
doors and other woodwork with white enamel.  The men had not been
allowed to spend the time necessary to prepare this work in a proper
manner, it had not been rubbed down smooth or properly filled up, and
it had not had a sufficient number of coats of paint to make it solid
white.  Now that the glossy enamel was put on, the work looked rather
rough and shady.

'It ain't 'arf all right, ain't it?' remarked Harlow, sarcastically,
indicating the door he had just finished.

Easton laughed: 'I can't understand how people pass such work,' he said.

'Old Sweater did make some remark about it the other day,' replied
Harlow, 'and I heard Misery tell 'im it was impossible to make a
perfect job of such old doors.'

'I believe that man's the biggest liar Gord ever made,' said Easton, an
opinion in which Harlow entirely concurred.

'I wonder what the time is?' said the latter after a pause.

'I don't know exactly,' replied Easton, 'but it can't be far off
twelve.'

''E don't seem to be comin', does 'e?' Harlow continued.

'No: and I shouldn't be surprised if 'e didn't turn up at all, now.
P'raps 'e don't mean to stop nobody today after all.'

They spoke in hushed tones and glanced cautiously about them fearful of
being heard or observed.

'This is a bloody life, ain't it?' Harlow said, bitterly.  'Workin' our
guts out like a lot of slaves for the benefit of other people, and then
as soon as they've done with you, you're chucked aside like a dirty
rag.'

'Yes: and I begin to think that a great deal of what Owen says is true.
But for my part I can't see 'ow it's ever goin' to be altered, can you?'

Blowed if I know, mate.  But whether it can be altered or not, there's
one thing very certain; it won't be done in our time.'

Neither of them seemed to think that if the 'alteration' they spoke of
were to be accomplished at all they themselves would have to help to
bring it about.

'I wonder what they're doin' about the venetian blinds?' said Easton.
'Is there anyone doin' em yet?'

'I don't know; ain't 'eard nothing about 'em since the boy took 'em to
the shop.'

There was quite a mystery about these blinds.  About a month ago they
were taken to the paint-shop down at the yard to be repainted and
re-harnessed, and since then nothing had been heard of them by the men
working at the 'Cave'.

'P'hap's a couple of us will be sent there to do 'em next week,'
remarked Harlow.

'P'hap's so.  Most likely they'll 'ave to be done in a bloody 'urry at
the last minute.'

Presently Harlow--who was very anxious to know what time it was--went
downstairs to ask Slyme.  It was twenty minutes to twelve.

From the window of the room where Slyme was papering, one could see
into the front garden. Harlow paused a moment to watch Bundy and the
labourers, who were still working in the trenches at the drains, and as
he looked out he saw Hunter approaching the house.  Harlow drew back
hastily and returned to his work, and as he went he passed the word to
the other men, warning them of the approach of Misery.

Hunter entered in his usual manner and, after crawling quietly about
the house for about ten minutes, he went into the drawing room.

'I see you're putting the finishing touches on at last,' he said.

'Yes,' replied Owen.  'I've only got this bit of outlining to do now.'

'Ah, well, it looks very nice, of course,' said Misery in a voice of
mourning, 'but we've lost money over it.  It's taken you a week longer
to do than we allowed for; you said three weeks and it's taken you a
month; and we only allowed for fifteen books of gold, but you've been
and used twenty-three.'

'You can hardly blame me for that, you know,' answered Owen.  'I could
have got it done in the three weeks, but Mr Rushton told me not to
hurry for the sake of a day or two, because he wanted a good job.  He
said he would rather lose a little over it than spoil it; and as for
the extra gold, that was also his order.'

'Well, I suppose it can't be helped,' whined Misery.  'Anyhow, I'm very
glad it's done, because this kind of work don't pay.  We'll 'ave you
back on the brush on Monday morning; we want to get outside done next
week if it keeps fine.'

The 'brush' alluded to by Nimrod was the large 'pound' brush used in
ordinary painting.

Misery now began wandering about the house, in and out of the rooms,
sometimes standing for several minutes silently watching the hands as
they worked. As he watched them the men became nervous and awkward,
each one dreading that he might be one of those who were to be paid off
at one o'clock.

At about five minutes to twelve Hunter went down to the paint-shop--the
scullery--where Crass was mixing some colour, and getting ready some
'empties' to be taken to the yard.

'I suppose the b--r's gone to ask Crass which of us is the least use,'
whispered Harlow to Easton.

'I wouldn't be surprised if it was you and me, for two,' replied the
latter in the same tone.  'You can't trust Crass you know, for all 'e
seems so friendly to our faces.  You never know what 'e ses behind our
backs.'

'You may be sure it won't be Sawkins or any of the other light-weights,
because Nimrod won't want to pay us sixpence ha'penny for painting
guttering and rainpipes when THEY can do it near enough for fourpence
ha'penny and fivepence.  They won't be able to do the sashes, though,
will they?'

'I don't know so much about that,' replied Easton.  'Anything seems to
be good enough for Hunter.'

'Look out!  Ere 'e comes!' said Harlow, and they both relapsed into
silence and busied themselves with their work.  Misery stood watching
them for some time without speaking, and then went out of the house.
They crept cautiously to the window of a room that overlooked the
garden and, peeping furtively out, they saw him standing on the brink
of one of the trenches, moodily watching Bundy and his mates as they
toiled at the drains.  Then, to their surprise and relief, he turned
and went out of the gate!  They just caught sight of one of the wheels
of his bicycle as he rode away.

The slaughter was evidently to be put off until next week!  It seemed
too good to be true.

'P'hap's 'e's left a message for some of us with Crass?' suggested
Easton.  'I don't think it's likely, but it's just possible.'

'Well, I'm goin' down to ask 'im,' said Harlow, desperately.  'We may
as well know the worst at once.'

He returned in a few minutes with the information that Hunter had
decided not to stop anyone that day because he wanted to get the
outside finished during the next week, if possible.

The hands received this intelligence with mixed feelings, because
although it left them safe for the present, it meant that nearly
everybody would certainly be stopped next Saturday, if not before;
whereas if a few had been sacked today it would have made it all the
better for the rest.  Still, this aspect of the business did not
greatly interfere with the relief that they all felt at knowing that
the immediate danger was over; and the fact that it was
Saturday--pay-day--also served to revive their drooping spirits.  They
all felt pretty certain that Misery would return no more that day, and
presently Harlow began to sing the old favourite.  'Work! for the night
is coming!' the refrain of which was soon taken up by nearly everyone
in the house:

        'Work! for the night is coming,
        Work in the morning hours.
        Work! for the night is coming,
        Work 'mid springing flowers.

        'Work while the dew is sparkling,
        Work in the noonday sun!
        Work! for the night is coming
        When man's work is done!'

When this hymn was finished, someone else, imitating the whine of a
street-singer, started, 'Oh, where is my wandering boy tonight?' and
then Harlow--who by some strange chance had a penny--took it out of his
pocket and dropped it on the floor, the ringing of the coin being
greeted with shouts of 'Thank you, kind lady,' from several of the
singers.  This little action of Harlow's was the means of bringing a
most extraordinary circumstance to light.  Although it was Saturday
morning, several of the others had pennies or half-pence! and at the
conclusion of each verse they all followed Harlow's example and the
house resounded with the ringing of falling coins, cries of 'Thank you,
kind lady,' 'Thank you, sir,' and 'Gord bless you,' mingled with shouts
of laughter.

'My wandering boy' was followed by a choice selection of choruses of
well-known music-hall songs, including 'Goodbye, my Bluebell', 'The
Honeysuckle and the Bee', 'I've got 'em!' and 'The Church Parade', the
whole being tastefully varied and interspersed with howls, shrieks,
curses, catcalls, and downward explosions of flatulence.

In the midst of the uproar Crass came upstairs.

''Ere!' he shouted.  'For Christ's sake make less row!  Suppose Nimrod
was to come back!'

'Oh, he ain't comin' any more today,' said Harlow, recklessly.

'Besides, what if 'e does come?' cried Easton.  'Oo cares for 'im?'

'Well, we never know; and for that matter Rushton or Sweater might come
at any minit.'

With this, Crass went muttering back to the scullery, and the men
relapsed into their usual silence.

At ten minutes to one they all ceased work, put away their colours and
locked up the house.  There were a number of 'empties' to be taken away
and left at the yard on their way to the office; these Crass divided
amongst the others--carrying nothing himself--and then they all set out
for the office to get their money, cracking jokes as they went along.
Harlow and Easton enlivened the journey by coughing significantly
whenever they met a young woman, and audibly making some complimentary
remark about her personal appearance.  If the girl smiled, each of them
eagerly claimed to have 'seen her first', but if she appeared offended
or 'stuck up', they suggested that she was cross-cut or that she had
been eating vinegar with a fork.  Now and then they kissed their hands
affectionately to servant-girls whom they saw looking out of windows.
Some of these girls laughed, others looked indignant, but whichever way
they took it was equally amusing to Crass and the rest, who were like a
crowd of boys just let out of school.

It will be remembered that there was a back door to Rushton's office;
in this door was a small sliding panel or trap-door with a little shelf
at the bottom.  The men stood in the road on the pavement outside the
closed door, their money being passed out to them through the sliding
panel.  As there was no shelter, when it rained they occasionally got
wet through while waiting to be paid.  With some firms it is customary
to call out the names of the men and pay them in order of seniority or
ability, but there was no such system here; the man who got to the
aperture first was paid first, and so on.  The result was that there
was always a sort of miniature 'Battle of Life', the men pushing and
struggling against each other as if their lives depended upon their
being paid by a certain time.

On the ledge of the little window through which their money was passed
there was always a Hospital collection-box.  Every man put either a
penny or twopence into this box.  Of course, it was not compulsory to
do so, but they all did, because they felt that any man who omitted to
contribute might be 'marked'.  They did not all agree with contributing
to the Hospital, for several reasons.  They knew that the doctors at
the Hospital made a practice of using the free patients to make
experiments upon, and they also knew that the so-called 'free' patients
who contribute so very largely directly to the maintenance of such
institutions, get scant consideration when they apply for the 'free'
treatment, and are plainly given to understand that they are receiving
'charity'.  Some of the men thought that, considering the extent to
which they contributed, they should be entitled to attention as a right.

After receiving their wages, Crass, Easton, Bundy, Philpot, Harlow and
a few others adjourned to the Cricketers for a drink.  Owen went away
alone, and Slyme also went on by himself.  There was no use waiting for
Easton to come out of the public house, because there was no knowing
how long he would be; he might stay half an hour or two hours.

On his way home, in accordance with his usual custom, Slyme called at
the Post Office to put some of his wages in the bank.  Like most other
'Christians', he believed in taking thought for the morrow, what he
should eat and drink and wherewithal he was to be clothed.  He thought
it wise to layup for himself as much treasure upon earth as possible.
The fact that Jesus said that His disciples were not to do these things
made no more difference to Slyme's conduct than it does to the conduct
of any other 'Christian'.  They are all agreed that when Jesus said
this He meant something else: and all the other inconvenient things
that Jesus said are disposed of in the same way.  For instance, these
'disciples' assure us that when Jesus said, 'Resist not evil', 'If a
man smite thee upon he right cheek turn unto him also the left', He
really meant 'Turn on to him a Maxim gun; disembowel him with a bayonet
or batter in his skull with the butt end of a rifle!'  When He said,
'If one take thy coat, give him thy cloak also,' the 'Christians' say
that what He really meant was: 'If one take thy coat, give him six
months' hard labour. A few of the followers of Jesus admit that He
really did mean just what He said, but they say that the world would
never be able to go on if they followed out His teachings! That is
true.  It is probably the effect that Jesus intended His teachings to
produce.  It is altogether improbable that He wished the world to
continue along its present lines.  But, if these pretended followers
really think--as they say that they do--that the teachings of Jesus are
ridiculous and impracticable, why continue the hypocritical farce of
calling themselves 'Christians' when they don't really believe in or
follow Him at all?

As Jesus himself pointed out, there's no sense in calling Him 'Lord,
Lord' when they do not the things that He said.

This banking transaction finished, Slyme resumed his homeward way,
stopping only to purchase some sweets at a confectioner's.  He spent a
whole sixpence at once in this shop on a glass jar of sweets for the
baby.

Ruth was not surprised when she saw him come in alone; it was the usual
thing since Easton had become so friendly with Crass.

She made no reference to his absence, but Slyme noticed with secret
chagrin that she was annoyed and disappointed.  She was just finishing
scrubbing the kitchen floor and little Freddie was sitting up in a
baby's high chair that had a little shelf or table fixed in front of
it.  To keep him amused while she did her work, Ruth had given him a
piece of bread and raspberry jam, which the child had rubbed all over
his face and into his scalp, evidently being under the impression that
it was something for the improvement of the complexion, or a cure for
baldness.  He now looked as if he had been in a fight or a railway
accident.  The child hailed the arrival of Slyme with enthusiasm, being
so overcome with emotion that he began to shed tears, and was only
pacified when the man gave him the jar of sweets and took him out of
the chair.

Slyme's presence in the house had not proved so irksome as Easton and
Ruth had dreaded it would be.  Indeed, at first, he made a point of
retiring to his own room after tea every evening, until they invited
him to stay downstairs in the kitchen.  Nearly every Wednesday and
Saturday he went to a meeting, or an open-air preaching, when the
weather permitted, for he was one of a little zealous band of people
connected with the Shining Light Chapel who carried on the 'open-air'
work all the year round.  After a while, the Eastons not only became
reconciled to his presence in the house, but were even glad of it. Ruth
especially would often have been very lonely if he had not been there,
for it had lately become Easton's custom to spend a few evenings every
week with Crass at the Cricketers.

When at home Slyme passed his time playing a mandolin or making
fretwork photo frames.  Ruth had the baby's photograph taken a few
weeks after Slyme came, and the frame he made for it was now one of the
ornaments of the sitting-room.  The instinctive, unreasoning aversion
she had at first felt for him had passed away.  In a quiet, unobtrusive
manner he did her so many little services that she found it impossible
to dislike him.  At first, she used to address him as 'Mr' but after a
time she fell naturally into Easton's practice of calling him by his
first name.

As for the baby, he made no secret of his affection for the lodger, who
nursed and played with him for hours at a stretch.

'I'll serve your dinner now, Alf,' said Ruth when she had finished
scrubbing the floor, 'but I'll wait for mine for a little while.  Will
may come.'

'I'm in no hurry,' replied Slyme.  'I'll go and have a wash; he may be
here then.'

As he spoke, Slyme--who had been sitting by the fire nursing the
baby--who was trying to swallow the jar of sweets--put the child back
into the high chair, giving him one of the sticks of sweet out of the
jar to keep him quiet; and went upstairs to his own room.  He came down
again in about a quarter of an hour, and Ruth proceeded to serve his
dinner, for Easton was still absent.

'If I was you, I wouldn't wait for Will,' said Slyme, 'he may not come
for another hour or two.  It's after two o'clock now, and I'm sure you
must be hungry.'

'I suppose I may as well,' replied Ruth, hesitatingly.  'He'll most
likely get some bread and cheese at the "Cricketers", same as he did
last Saturday.'

'Almost sure to,' responded Slyme.

The baby had had his face washed while Slyme was upstairs.  Directly he
saw his mother eating he threw away the sugar-stick and began to cry,
holding out his arms to her.  She had to take him on her lap whilst she
ate her dinner, and feed him with pieces from her plate.

Slyme talked all the time, principally about the child.  He was very
fond of children, he said, and always got on well with them, but he had
really never known such an intelligent child--for his age--as Freddie.
His fellow-workmen would have been astonished had they been present to
hear him talking about the shape of the baby's head.  They would have
been astonished at the amount of knowledge he appeared to possess of
the science of Phrenology.  Ruth, at any rate, thought he was very
clever.

After a time the child began to grow fretful and refused to eat; when
his mother gave him a fresh piece of sugar-stick out of the jar he
threw it peevishly on the floor and began to whimper, rubbing his face
against his mother's bosom and pulling at her dress with his hands.
When Slyme first came Ruth had made a practice of withdrawing from the
room if he happened to be present when she wanted to nurse the child,
but lately she had been less sensitive. She was sitting with her back
to the window and she partly covered the baby's face with a light shawl
that she wore.  By the time they finished dinner the child had dozed
off to sleep.  Slyme got up from his chair and stood with his back to
the fire, looking down at them; presently he spoke, referring, of
course, to the baby:

'He's very like you, isn't he?'

'Yes,' replied Ruth.  'Everyone says he takes after me.'

Slyme moved a little closer, bending down to look at the slumbering
infant.

'You know, at first I thought he was a girl,' he continued after a
pause.  'He seems almost too pretty for a boy, doesn't he?'

Ruth smiled.  'People always take him for a girl at first,' she said.
'Yesterday I took him with me to the Monopole Stores to buy some
things, and the manager would hardly believe it wasn't a girl.'

The man reached out his hand and stroked the baby's face.

Although Slyme's behaviour had hitherto always been very correct, yet
there was occasionally an indefinable something in his manner when they
were alone that made Ruth feel conscious and embarrassed.  Now, as she
glanced up at him and saw the expression on his face she crimsoned with
confusion and hastily lowered her eyes without replying to his last
remark.  He did not speak again either, and they remained for several
minutes in silence, as if spellbound, Ruth oppressed with instinctive
dread, and Slyme scarcely less agitated, his face flushed and his heart
beating wildly. He trembled as he stood over her, hesitating and afraid.

And then the silence was suddenly broken by the creaking and clanging
of the front gate, heralding the tardy coming of Easton.  Slyme went
out into the scullery and, taking down the blacking brushes from the
shelf, began cleaning his boots.

It was plain from Easton's appearance and manner that he had been
drinking, but Ruth did not reproach him in any way; on the contrary,
she seemed almost feverishly anxious to attend to his comfort.

When Slyme finished cleaning his boots he went upstairs to his room,
receiving a careless greeting from Easton as he passed through the
kitchen.  He felt nervous and apprehensive that Ruth might say
something to Easton, and was not quite able to reassure himself with
the reflection that, after all, there was nothing to tell.  As for
Ruth, she had to postpone the execution of her hastily formed
resolution to tell her husband of Slyme's strange behaviour, for Easton
fell asleep in his chair before he had finished his dinner, and she had
some difficulty in waking him sufficiently to persuade him to go
upstairs to bed, where he remained until tea-time.  Probably he would
not have come down even then if it had not been for the fact that he
had made an appointment to meet Crass at the Cricketers.

Whilst Easton was asleep, Slyme had been downstairs in the kitchen,
making a fretwork frame.  He played with Freddie while Ruth prepared
the tea, and he appeared to her to be so unconscious of having done
anything unusual that she began to think that she must have been
mistaken in imagining that he had intended anything wrong.

After tea, Slyme put on his best clothes to go to his usual 'open-air'
meeting.  As a rule Easton and Ruth went out marketing together every
Saturday night, but this evening he could not wait for her because he
had promised to meet Crass at seven o'clock; so he arranged to see her
down town at eight.



Chapter 23

The 'Open-air'


During the last few weeks ever since he had been engaged on the
decoration of the drawing-room, Owen had been so absorbed in his work
that he had no time for other things.  Of course, all he was paid for
was the time he actually worked, but really every waking moment of his
time was given to the task.  Now that it was finished he felt something
like one aroused from a dream to the stern realities and terrors of
life.  By the end of next week, the inside of the house and part of the
outside would be finished, and as far as he knew the firm had nothing
else to do at present.  Most of the other employers in the town were in
the same plight, and it would be of no use to apply even to such of
them as had something to do, for they were not likely to take on a
fresh man while some of their regular hands were idle.

For the last month he had forgotten that he was ill; he had forgotten
that when the work at 'The Cave' was finished he would have to stand
off with the rest of the hands.  In brief, he had forgotten for the
time being that, like the majority of his fellow workmen, he was on the
brink of destitution, and that a few weeks of unemployment or idleness
meant starvation.  As far as illness was concerned, he was even worse
off than most others, for the greater number of them were members of
some sick benefit club, but Owen's ill-health rendered him ineligible
for membership of such societies.

As he walked homewards after being paid, feeling unutterably depressed
and weary, he began once more to think of the future; and the more he
thought of it the more dreadful it appeared.  Even looking at it in the
best possible light--supposing he did not fall too ill to work, or lose
his employment from some other cause--what was there to live for?  He
had been working all this week.  These few coins that he held in his
hand were the result, and he laughed bitterly as he thought of all they
had to try to do with this money, and of all that would have to be left
undone.

As he turned the corner of Kerk Street he saw Frankie coming to meet
him, and the boy catching sight of him at the same moment began running
and leapt into his arms with a joyous whoop.

'Mother told me to tell you to buy something for dinner before you come
home, because there's nothing in the house.'

'Did she tell you what I was to get?'

She did tell me something, but I forget what it was.  But I know she
said to get anything you like if you couldn't get what she told me to
tell you.'

'Well, we'll go and see what we can find,' said Owen.

'If I were you, I'd get a tin of salmon or some eggs and bacon,'
suggested Frankie as he skipped along holding his father's hand.  'We
don't want anything that's a lot of trouble to cook, you know, because
Mum's not very well today.'

'Is she up?'

She's been up all the morning, but she's lying down now.  We've done
all the work, though.  While she was making the beds I started washing
up the cups and saucers without telling her, but when she came in and
saw what a mess I'd made on the floor, she had to stop me doing it, and
she had to change nearly all my clothes as well, because I was almost
wet through; but I managed the wiping up all right when she did the
washing, and I swept the passage and put all my things tidy and made
the cat's bed.  And that just reminds me: will you please give me my
penny now?  I promised the cat that I'd bring him back some meat.'

Owen complied with the boy's request, and while the latter went to the
butcher's for the meat, Owen went into the grocer's to get something
for dinner, it being arranged that they were to meet again at the
corner of the street.  Owen was at the appointed place first and after
waiting some time and seeing no sign of the boy he decided to go
towards the butcher's to meet him.  When he came in sight of the shop
he saw the boy standing outside in earnest conversation with the
butcher, a jolly-looking stoutly built man, with a very red face. Owen
perceived at once that the child was trying to explain something,
because Frankie had a habit of holding his head sideways and
supplementing his speech by spreading out his fingers and making quaint
gestures with his hands whenever he found it difficult to make himself
understood.  The boy was doing this now, waving one hand about with the
fingers and thumb extended wide, and with the other flourishing a paper
parcel which evidently contained the pieces of meat. Presently the man
laughed heartily and after shaking hands with Frankie went into the
shop to attend to a customer, and Frankie rejoined his father.

'That butcher's a very decent sort of chap, you know, Dad,' he said.
'He wouldn't take a penny for the meat.'

'Is that what you were talking to him about?'

No; we were talking about Socialism.  You see, this is the second time
he wouldn't take the money, and the first time he did it I thought he
must be a Socialist, but I didn't ask him then.  But when he did it
again this time I asked him if he was.  So he said, No.  He said he
wasn't quite mad yet.  So I said, "If you think that Socialists are all
mad, you're very much mistaken, because I'm a Socialist myself, and I'm
quite sure I'M not mad."  So he said he knew I was all right, but he
didn't understand anything about Socialism himself--only that it meant
sharing out all the money so that everyone could have the same.  So
then I told him that's not Socialism at all!  And when I explained it
to him properly and advised him to be one, he said he'd think about it.
So I said if he'd only do that he'd be sure to change over to our side;
and then he laughed and promised to let me know next time he sees me,
and I promised to lend him some literature. You won't mind, will you,
Dad?'

'Of course not; when we get home we'll have a look through what we've
got and you can take him some of them.'

'I know!' cried Frankie eagerly.  'The two very best of all.  Happy
Britain and England for the English.'

He knew that these were 'two of the best' because he had often heard
his father and mother say so, and he had noticed that whenever a
Socialist friend came to visit them, he was also of the same opinion.



As a rule on Saturday evenings they all three went out together to do
the marketing, but on this occasion, in consequence of Nora being
unwell, Owen and Frankie went by themselves.  The frequent recurrence
of his wife's illness served to increase Owen's pessimism with regard
to the future, and the fact that he was unable to procure for her the
comforts she needed was not calculated to dispel the depression that
filled his mind as he reflected that there was no hope of better times.

In the majority of cases, for a workman there is no hope of
advancement.  After he has learnt his trade and become a 'journeyman'
all progress ceases.  He is at the goal.  After he has been working ten
or twenty years he commands no more than he did at first--a bare living
wage--sufficient money to purchase fuel to keep the human machine
working.  As he grows older he will have to be content with even less;
and all the time he holds his employment at the caprice and by the
favour of his masters, who regard him merely as a piece of mechanism
that enables them to accumulate money--a thing which they are justified
in casting aside as soon as it becomes unprofitable. And the workman
must not only be an efficient money-producing machine, but he must also
be the servile subject of his masters.  If he is not abjectly civil and
humble, if he will not submit tamely to insult, indignity, and every
form of contemptuous treatment that occasion makes possible, he can be
dismissed, and replaced in a moment by one of the crowd of unemployed
who are always waiting for his job.  This is the status of the majority
of the 'Heirs of all the ages' under the present system.

As he walked through the crowded streets holding Frankie by the hand,
Owen thought that to voluntarily continue to live such a life as this
betokened a degraded mind.  To allow one's child to grow up to suffer
it in turn was an act of callous, criminal cruelty.

In this matter he held different opinions from most of his fellow
workmen.  The greater number of them were quite willing and content
that their children should be made into beasts of burden for the
benefit of other people.  As he looked down upon the little, frail
figure trotting along by his side, Owen thought for the thousandth time
that it would be far better for the child to die now: he would never be
fit to be a soldier in the ferocious Christian Battle of Life.

Then he remembered Nora.  Although she was always brave, and never
complained, he knew that her life was one of almost incessant physical
suffering; and as for himself he was tired and sick of it all.  He had
been working like a slave all his life and there was nothing to show
for it--there never would be anything to show for it.  He thought of
the man who had killed his wife and children.  The jury had returned
the usual verdict, 'Temporary Insanity'.  It never seemed to occur to
these people that the truth was that to continue to suffer hopelessly
like this was evidence of permanent insanity.

But supposing that bodily death was not the end.  Suppose there was
some kind of a God?  If there were, it wasn't unreasonable to think
that the Being who was capable of creating such a world as this and who
seemed so callously indifferent to the unhappiness of His creatures,
would also be capable of devising and creating the other Hell that mos